Update the BIP Process (#2)
murchandamus/bips: bip-update-process.md

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 2024-05-13
License: CC0-1.0
Replaces: 2
```

## tk: More input requested on following open questions

- Should we have a Final and/or Active Status?
- Should we add a mandatory Change Log section to BIPs?
- Should we introduce versioning/revisions to (final) BIPs?

## Abstract

A _Bitcoin improvement proposal (BIP)_ provides a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept,

> feature, standard, implementation guideline, best-practice, or incident report relevant to the Bitcoin community.

Reviewer: nit, no hyphen here

```suggestion
feature, standard, implementation guideline, best practice, or incident report relevant to the Bitcoin community.
```

Reviewer: incident report? (an example may help)

Author: I was thinking of [BIP 50](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0050.mediawiki)

Author: Added a link to BIP 50.

BIPs are intended to be the primary mechanism for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and
documenting design decisions that have gone into Bitcoin implementations. Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors,
the _BIP champions_[^champ], and represents the champions’ opinion or recommendation. The champions are expected to foster
discussion, address feedback and dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance adoption of their proposal within the
Bitcoin community.

The BIPs repository serves as a highly visible platform to put forward mature proposals. The repository’s visibility
facilitates the distributed consideration of proposals by establishing the current state of the proposal. The
repository’s versioning of the text-based BIPs retains the historical record of each proposal.
The BIPs repository does not[^acceptance] aim to track acceptance, adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to facilitate a

> quick overview of various BIPs’s statuses to repository visitors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quick overview of various BIPs' statuses to repository visitors.
```

or simply `s/various BIPs's/BIP/`

Author: Took the second variant.

BIP process.

## What is a BIP?

### What is the significance of BIPs?

Individual BIPs do not represent Bitcoin community consensus or a general recommendation for implementation. A BIP
represents a personal recommendations by the BIP champions to the Bitcoin community. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or
multiple implementations or even incorporated into the Bitcoin protocol.

### What should be documented in a BIP?

The BIPs repository collects any proposals relevant to the Bitcoin community.

OR:

The BIPs repository is focused on information and technology that supports the bitcoin currency.[^astroturfing]

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

BIPs should be written in mediawiki or markdown format.

Each BIP should have the following parts:

* Preamble -- Headers containing metadata about the BIP (see the section [BIP header preamble](#bip-header-preamble)
  below).
* Abstract -- A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.
* Motivation -- The motivation is critical for BIPs. It should clearly explain what issue the BIP addresses, and how the
  existing situation is inadequate to address the problem that the BIP solves.

> * Rationale -- The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular

Reviewer 2: Motivation covers the high-level rationale already, better for the detailed rationale to come after the Specification, I think?

Author: Moved the Rationale below the Specification.

  design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work. The rationale
  should address important objections or concerns raised during discussion.
* Specification -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The
  specification should be detailed enough to enable any Bitcoin project to create an interoperable implementation.
* Backwards compatibility -- BIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these

>   incompatibilities and their severity. The BIP must explain how the champion proposes to deal with these

Reviewer 2: Can simplify this a bit, I think: "Backwards compatibility - BIPs must include a section describing any backwards incompatibilities and their severity. The BIP must explain how implementors/users should deal with these incompatibilities."

Author: Adopted your suggestion, thanks

  incompatibilities.

> * Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors and documentation must be

Reviewer 2: Both reference implementations and test vectors might make more sense to just be auxiliary files (eg bip-0340 works this way), with a link from the document than being included in the doc itself?

Perhaps it would make sense to link to the first one or two real implementations in the preamble in a similar way to Post-History, perhaps as a pre-requisite for switching from Nominated to Active.

Author: I added that the reference implementation may be provided as an auxiliary file. I don’t think it is a good idea to link to several actual implementations as that brings us back to the issues with the "Other Implementations" section.

  completed before the BIP can be given status "Nominated". It is recommended to focus on specification and rationale
  before writing code.
* Footnotes -- A collection of footnotes cited in the BIP, and a place to list non-inline hyperlink targets
* Copyright -- The BIP must be placed under an acceptable license ([see BIP Licensing below](#bip-licensing)).

Some sections may not be necessary for all BIPs. When in doubt, a section should be included and briefly state how its
topic has been sufficiently addressed.

#### BIP header preamble

Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822 style header preamble. The headers must appear in the following order. Headers
marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required.

```
  BIP: <BIP number, or "?" before being assigned>

> * Layer: <Consensus (soft fork) | Consensus (hard fork) | Peer Services | API/RPC | Applications>

Reviewer: Should the Layer now be mandatory? e.g. as stated below here: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2/files#diff-9dc51c3dd7223f85ea1765cb64d57a84fb3d8f9425c2d705e8cd9a5bde2849a4R398

Author: It does not necessarily make sense for Informational or Process BIPs

  Title: <BIP title; maximum 44 characters>

>   Champions: <list of champions’ names and email addresses>

Reviewer: "Authors" (here, and throughout below) would be clearer (less confusing) terminology for a wider range of people, as the usage of "champion" here is not the primary or most well-known meaning of the word.

When a new author takes over a BIP, it seems good to list both new and original authors as follows: 

`<original author(s)>, <new author>`

Reviewer 2: Could just list the old author in the changelog, so that the preamble isn't cluttered with out of date info.

Author: Still thinking about that, will revisit next week. AJ suggested "Proponent" as an alternative.

Author: How about "Advocate"?

Author: The general feedback seems to be that the obvious term is author, so I have changed the document to that effect

  Status: <Draft | Nominated | Active | Abandoned>
  Type: <Standards Track | Informational | Process>
  Created: <date created on, in ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format>
  License: <abbreviation for approved license(s)>
* License-Code: <abbreviation for code under different approved license(s)>

> * Post-History: <list of mailing list threads, or other noteworthy discussions in "date: link" format>

Reviewer 2: "Discussion" rather than Post-History?

Author: I was hoping to not change the Preamble too much, but that would be a better term. Will revisit next week.

Author: Sure, I replaced the Post-History header with Discussion

* Requires: <BIP number(s)>
* Replaces: <BIP number>
* Superseded-By: <BIP number>
```

> __BIP__: BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. Champions must not self-assign numbers. Numbers are assigned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__BIP__: BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. The proposal must not self-assign a BIP number. Numbers are assigned
```

date be?]

__Post-History__: Post-History is used to record when new versions of the BIP are posted to bitcoin mailing lists. Dates
should be in yyyy-mm-dd format, e.g. 2001-08-14. Post-History is permitted to be a link to a specific thread in a
mailing list archive.

__Requires__: BIPs may have a Requires header, indicating the BIP numbers that this BIP depends on.

__Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Superseded-By header indicating that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by a
later document; the value is the number of the BIP that replaces the current document. The newer BIP must have a
Replaces header containing the number of the BIP that it rendered obsolete.

#### Auxiliary Files

BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory for that BIP named
`bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number. File names in the subdirectory do not need to adhere to a specific
convention.

### BIP types

* A **Standards Track BIP** describes any change that affects most or all Bitcoin implementations, such as a change to the
  network protocol, a change in block or transaction validity rules, or any change or addition that affects the

>   interoperability of applications using Bitcoin. Standards Track BIPs consist of two parts, a design document and a

Reviewer: Hm, would policy inter-op BIPs henceforth fall under this? We're currently typing them as Informational.

```suggestion
  interoperability of applications using Bitcoin. Standards Track BIPs consist of two parts: a design document, and a
```

  consensus or recommendation, so users and implementors are free to ignore Informational BIPs or follow their advice.
* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding Bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
  BIPs are like Standards Track BIPs, but apply to areas other than the Bitcoin protocol itself. They may propose an
  implementation, but not to Bitcoin's codebase; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they
  are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures,
  guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process. Any meta-BIP is also considered a Process BIP.

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for Bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have a champion (or multiple
champions)—someone who authors the BIP, gathers feedback, shepherds the discussion in the appropriate forums, and
finally recommends a mature proposal to the community.

![Status transitions](bip-update-process/status-transitions.png "Status Transitions in the BIP Workflow")

### Ideation

> After having an idea, the champion should evaluate whether it is BIP-able. The idea must be of interest to the broader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After having an idea, the champion should evaluate whether it meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in this BIP. The idea must be of interest to the broader
```

Author: Thanks, great.

to the Bitcoin community, the champion should work on drafting a BIP.

It is highly recommended that a single BIP contain a single key proposal or new idea. The more focused the BIP, the more
successful it tends to be. If in doubt, split your BIP into several well-focused ones.

### Progression through BIP Statuses

As the first draft is taking shape, the champion should present it to the [Bitcoin development mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev). This gives the champion a chance to collect initial feedback and address
fundamental concerns. If the champion wishes to work in public on the draft at this stage, it is recommended that they
open a pull request against their personal fork of the BIPs repository instead of the main BIPs repository.

The following sections refer to BIP Status Field values. The BIP Status Field is defined in the Header Preamble
specification below.

#### Draft

After fleshing out the draft further and ensuring that it is of high quality and properly formatted, the champion should
open a pull request to the [BIPs repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). The draft BIP must adhere to the

> formatting requirements specified below and named with a working title of the form "bip-authorname-topicofproposal". The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formatting requirements specified below and named with a working title of the form "bip-title-topicofproposal". The
```

Author: Changed to "bip-title"

champion must not self-assign a number to the BIP draft.

> BIPs that (1) adhere to the formatting requirements, (2) are on-topic, and (3) have materially progressed beyond the

Reviewer: maybe link "on-topic" to the astroturfing footnote

Author: Done

interest: number assignment facilitates the distributed discussion of ideas, but before a BIP garners some interest of
the Bitcoin community, there is no need to refer to it by a number.

BIP drafts are also not ready for number assignment if they duplicate efforts, disregard formatting rules, are too
unfocused or too broad, fail to provide proper motivation, fail to address backwards compatibility, or when the proposed
feature’s specification is unclear or incomplete. Reviewers and BIP editors should provide guidance on how the draft may
be improved to progress towards readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious proposals, or have
stopped to make progress may be closed.

When the BIP draft is complete, a BIP editor will assign a BIP type (see below), and merge it to the BIPs repository.
After the BIP is merged to the repository, its main focus should no longer shift significantly, even while the champion
may continue to update the draft as necessary in the git repository. Updates to drafts by the champion should also be
submitted as pull requests.

> #### Nominated[^nominated]

Author: AJ suggested to call this "Ready" instead.

Author: Went with Preliminary

When the champion is confident that their BIP represents a net-improvement, is
clear, comprehensive, has a working reference implementation (if applicable),
and is ready for adoption by the Bitcoin community, they may update the BIP’s
status to Nominated to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation
of the BIP. Where applicable, the champion must ensure that any proposed
specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, a
BIP’s content should only be adjusted in minor details, e.g. to improve language, clarify ambiguities, backfill
omissions in the specification, add test vectors for edge-cases, or address other issues discovered as the BIP is
adopted.

> As time passes, substantial changes or changes that interfere with existing implementations are increasingly heavily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As time passes, substantial changes, or changes that interfere with existing implementations, are increasingly heavily
```

Author: Sorry, that was a vestige of when I planned for Nominated to be the last state of BIPs. I changed and combined the sentence with the next.

discouraged.

A Nominated BIP can only transition to Active or to Abandoned. If a Nominated BIP is found to need substantial

> functional changes, it should be moved to Abandoned and a new BIP should be drafted instead.

Reviewer 2: The previous paragraph implied substantial changes aren't necessarily forbidden.

Author: Ah, I overlooked this line when I added Active back. It is still from when Nominated was the last Status BIPs would achieve. I’ll probably have to rewrite that or move that.

Author: I think this should be addressed

#### Active

> At the earliest three months after a BIP has been moved to Nominated, a BIP may be advanced to Active upon request of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the earliest three months after a BIP has been moved to Nominated, a BIP may be advanced to Active upon request by
```

> any community member by providing evidence that the idea described in the BIP is in active use. Such evidence includes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any community member with evidence that the idea described in the BIP is in active use. Such evidence includes
```

for example: two or more projects having deployed support for the BIP in mainnet software releases, a soft fork
proposal’s activation criteria having been met on the network, or rough consensus for the BIP having been demonstrated.

At that point, the BIP should be considered final and any breaking changes to the BIP should be proposed as a new
separate BIP.

##### Process BIPs

A process BIP may change status from Nominated to Active when it achieves rough consensus on the mailing list. Such a
proposal is said to have rough consensus if it has been open to discussion on the development mailing list for at least
one month, and no person maintains any unaddressed substantiated objections to it. Addressed or obstructive objections
may be ignored/overruled by general agreement that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning must be
given in such circumstances. An Active Process BIP may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification
has rough consensus per the same criteria.

##### Revisions

Any changes to a BIP after it has transitioned to Nominated or Active are tracked with date and description in a

> Change Log section.

Author: The "Change Log" section should be added to the specification of the sections above.

Author: Added a description of the Change Log section.

> Change Log section.

Reviewer: I think this needs to provide a standard formatting that BIPs need to follow.

Author: Added a description for the Change Log section

#### Abandoned[^abandoned]

A BIP may be labeled Abandoned when its champion has stopped working on it, no longer pursues adoption of their complete
proposal, or no longer recommends the proposed approach, AND the BIP is not in active use.

BIP champions may decide on their own to change their BIP’s status from Draft to Abandoned.

BIPs with the status Nominated can be moved to Abandoned after a champion announces this transition to the
Bitcoin Developer Mailing List and is not opposed within 14 days. One of the opposers must become the new BIP champion

> for the BIP to remain Nominated. A BIP can also be transitioned to Abandoned by BIP Editors, if it is not in active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the BIP to remain Nominated. A BIP can also be moved to Abandoned by BIP Editors, if it is not in active
```

(a few suggestions to not repeat the double verb "be transitioned" as much, as it is awkward, and also as it has become a loaded term)

Author: True, although I believe the jargon does use _state transition diagram_. Updated the BIP to use different terms.

use, its champion has become unresponsive and no new champion volunteers within four weeks.

> A BIP may be transitioned from Active to Abandoned when it is no longer in active use. Any community member may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A BIP may evolve from Active to Abandoned when it is no longer in active use. Any community member may
```

after the License header. Again, each acceptable license must be referenced by their respective abbreviation given
below.

For example, a preamble specifying the optional License-Code header might look like:

    License:         CC0-1.0
    License-Code:    MIT

In this case, the code in the BIP is not available under CC0-1.0, but is only available under the terms of the MIT
License.

BIPs are not required to be *exclusively* licensed under approved terms, and may also be licensed under unacceptable
licenses *in addition to* at least one acceptable license. In this case, only the acceptable license(s) should be listed
in the License and License-Code headers. It is recommended that BIPs are made available under at least one license
that is not a software license[^licenses].

It is recommended that BIPs that include literal code be dual-licensed under the same license terms as the project it
modifies. For example, literal code intended for Bitcoin Core would ideally be dual-licensed under the MIT license terms
as well as one of the above with the rest of the BIP text.

In all cases, details of the licensing terms must be provided in the Copyright section of the BIP.

> #### Recommended license

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Recommended licenses
```

* CC0-1.0: [Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)
* GNU-All-Permissive: [GNU All-Permissive License](http://www.gnu.org/prep/maintain/html_node/License-Notices-for-Other-Files.html)

#### Not recommended, but acceptable licenses

* BSD-2-Clause: [OSI-approved BSD 2-clause license](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause)
* BSD-3-Clause: [OSI-approved BSD 3-clause license](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause)
* CC-BY-4.0: [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
* CC-BY-SA-4.0: [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)
* MIT: [Expat/MIT/X11 license](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

#### Not acceptable licenses

All licenses not explicitly included in the above lists are not acceptable terms for a Bitcoin Improvement Proposal.

> However, BIPs predating the acceptance of this BIP were allowed under other terms, and should use these abbreviation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, BIPs predating the acceptance of this BIP were allowed under other terms, and should use these abbreviations
```

revision. Once the BIP is ready it should be submitted as a "pull request" to the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips) where it may get further feedback.

For each new BIP draft pull request that comes in, an editor checks the following:

* Draft has been previously discussed on the Bitcoin development mailing
* Title accurately describes the content
* Proposal is of general interest and/or pertains to more than one Bitcoin project/implementation
* Document is properly formatted
* Licensing terms are acceptable
* Motivation, Rationale, and Backwards Compatibility have been addressed (where applicable)
* The defined Layer header must be correctly assigned for the given specification
* The BIP is ready: it is complete, comprehensible, and technically feasible

Editors do NOT evaluate whether the proposal is likely to be adopted.

A BIP editor will:

* Assign a BIP number in the pull request
* Merge the pull request when it is ready
* List the BIP in the [README](README.mediawiki)

The BIP editors are intended to fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. The BIP editors monitor BIP
changes, and update BIP headers as appropriate.

> BIP editors may also, at their option, unilaterally make and merge strictly-editorial changes to BIPs, such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BIP editors may also, at their option, unilaterally make and merge strictly editorial changes to BIPs, such as
```

correcting misspellings, fixing broken links, etc. as long as they do not change the meaning or conflict with the
original intent of the author.

> ## Changes from BIP-2

Reviewer: Very helpful! I should have read this first :)

- Refer to the proponent of a BIP as "Champion"
- Status field is no longer modeled around the workflow of consensus changes. The only remaining status are DRAFT,
  NOMINATED, ACTIVE, and ABANDONED. The statuses Deferred, Final, Obsolete, Proposed, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn
  are sunset.

> - BIPs can no longer be rejected due to inactivity, but BIPs that get no adoption whose champion has become unreachable can be moved to Abandoned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- BIPs can no longer be rejected due to inactivity, but BIPs that see no adoption and whose champion has become unreachable can be moved to Abandoned
```

- Judgment calls required from BIP Editors are mostly reassigned either to the audience or the BIP champion
- Tracking of adoption, acceptance, and community consensus is out of scope for the BIPs repository
- Layer header is no longer restricted to Standards Track

> - Auxiliary files are only permitted in the corresponding BIP’s subdirectory as nobody used the alternative of labeling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Auxiliary files are only permitted in the corresponding BIP’s subdirectory, as no one used the alternative of labeling
```

  them with the BIP number
- The Comments-URI and Comment-Summary headers are dropped from the preamble, Comments as an aspect of the process are
  discontinued[^comments]
- The Discussions-To header is dropped, as it has never been used
- List of acceptable licenses was reduced to the ones previously used
- "Other Implementations" sections are discouraged

## Copyright

This BIP is licensed under the [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license.

## Related Specifications

- [BIP 1: BIP Purpose and Guidelines](bip-0001.mediawiki)
- [BIP 2: BIP Process, revised](BIP-0002.mediawiki)
- [BIP 123: BIP Classification](BIP-0123.mediawiki)
* [RFC 7282: On Consensus and Humming in the IETF](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7282)

## Rationale

[^astroturfing]: **What does it mean to be focused on Bitcoin the currency?**  

>     Proposals to astroturf on the Bitcoin network to store data, bootstrap their own consensus mechanism, or facilitate

Reviewer: perhaps add something like "or otherwise not keeping with the Bitcoin philosophy"

Author: I want to get rid of that underspecified requirement. Happy to add one or multiple concrete criteria that can be evaluated more objectively.

Author: Or if you have a definition of what it means to "follow Bitcoin philosophy" that could fit this document, I’d also be open to define it, so it can be evaluated in this context.

Reviewer 3: I have never heard the word "astroturfing". After reading definition in the [Wikipedia article on astroturfing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astroturfing), I have an idea what it means to "astroturf on the Bitcoin network, but I don't think this is sufficiently clear here.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the word "astroturf" is even needed here?

Would "bootstrap their own consensus methods" preclude publishing a BIP for something like [spacechains](https://github.com/RubenSomsen/spacechains) -- that is a sidechain whose native currency (in which fees are paid) is pegged to BTC, where the chain tip is determined by bumping a utxo on bitcoin (ie sidechain miners compete by fee-bumping a bitcoin transaction, rather than doing direct proof-of-work)? That doesn't really seem optimal to me; but I suppose it could be revisited if/when such a proposal ever becomes practical/supported, so whatever.

    another currency are not on-topic.
[^comments]: **Why were comments, Comments-URI, and Comment-Summary removed from the process?**  
    The comments feature saw marginal use. Hardly any BIPs received more than two comments and this led to many
    situations in which the opinion of a single comment or two commenters ended up sourcing the comment summary. While
    some of those comments may have been representative of broadly held opinions, it also overstated the importance of
    individual comments. As collecting feedback in this accessible fashion failed, the new process puts the onus back on
    the audience to make their own evaluation.
[^OtherImplementations]: **What is the issue with "Other Implementations" sections in BIPs?**  
    In the past, some BIPs had "Other Implementations" sections that caused frequent change requests to existing BIPs.

>     This put an onus on the BIP champions, and frequently lead to lingering pull requests due to the corresponding BIPs’

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This put an onus on the BIP champions, and frequently led to lingering pull requests due to the corresponding BIPs’
```

    champions no longer participating in the process. Many of these alternative implementations eventually became
    unmaintained or were low-quality to begin with. Therefore, "Other Implementations" sections are heavily discouraged.
[^champ]: **Why do we prefer 'Champion' over 'Author'?**  
    Sometimes BIP authors discontinue work on BIPs or leave Bitcoin development. In that case another proponent may

>     adopt the BIP as a new owner, even if they are not the original author.

Reviewer 2: "proponent" seems a much better term for the person behind a proposal than champion

Author: The general feedback seems to be that the obvious term is author, so I have changed the document to that effect

[^nominated]: **Why has the Proposed Status been renamed to Nominated?**  
    Some reviewers of this BIP brought up that all Bitcoin Improvement _Proposals_ are _proposed_ per se. Therefore, a
    new name was chosen.
[^abandoned]: **Why was the Abandoned Status introduced?**  
    Previously, we had Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn which all meant some flavor of "work has

>     stopped on this". The author of this BIP feels that all of these can be represented by Abandoned.

Reviewer: agree

Author: Great, thanks for corroborating

    * MIT: 4

    The following previously acceptable licenses have been dropped, because they have never been used in the BIPs process:

    * AGPL-3.0+: [GNU Affero General Public License (AGPL), version 3 or newer](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html)
    * Apache-2.0: [Apache License, version 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
    * BSL-1.0: [Boost Software License, version 1.0](http://www.boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt)
    * FDL-1.3: [GNU Free Documentation License, version 1.3](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.en.html)
    * GPL-2.0+: [GNU General Public License (GPL), version 2 or newer](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html)
    * LGPL-2.1+: [GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), version 2.1 or newer](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.en.html)

    Some of the previously recommended licenses explicitly state that they apply to software, but BIPs are foremost text
    documents. As such, the previously recommended BSD-[2|3]-Clause licenses that only apply to software have been moved to
    the "Not recommended" section. This leaves us with only the CC0-1.0 and the GNU-All-Permissive licenses as recommended.

>     Why are there software licenses included?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Why are software licenses included?
```

>     * Some BIPs, especially concerning the consensus layer, may include literal code in the BIP itself which may not be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Some BIPs, in particular those concerning the consensus layer, may include literal code in the BIP itself which may not be
```

      available under the exact license terms of the BIP.
    * Despite this, not all software licenses would be acceptable for content included in BIPs.

    Why are OPL and Public Domain no longer acceptable for new BIPs?

>     * Public domain is not universally recognised as a legitimate action, thus it is inadvisable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Public domain is not universally recognised as a legitimate action, thus it is inadvisable.
```

>     * The OPL is generally regarded as obsolete, and not a license suitable for new publications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * The OPL is generally regarded as obsolete, and not a license suitable for new publications.
```

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 2024-05-13
License: CC0-1.0
Requires: 123
Replaces: 2
```

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs and policies relating to
the publication of BIPs. It replaces BIP 2 with a streamlined process, and may be amended in the future to address the
evolving needs of the BIP process.

The BIPs repository serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals. The repository’s visibility
facilitates the distributed consideration of BIPs by providing an established source to retrieve the latest versions of
BIPs. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and allows any community member to easily retain a
complete copy of the archive.

The BIPs repository does not aim to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to

> provide a quick overview of BIP statuses (see below) to visitors.

Author: Add a link to the relevant section below

unfocused or too broad, fail to provide proper motivation, fail to address backwards compatibility, or when the proposed
feature’s specification is unclear or incomplete. Reviewers and BIP editors should provide guidance on how the draft may
be improved to progress towards readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious proposals, or have
stopped to make progress may be closed.

When the BIP draft is complete, a BIP editor will assign a BIP type (see below), and merge it to the BIPs repository.
After the BIP is merged to the repository, its main focus should no longer shift significantly, even while the author
may continue to update the draft as necessary in the git repository. Updates to drafts by the author should also be
submitted as pull requests.

#### Preliminary[^preliminary]

When the author is confident that their BIP represents a net-improvement, is clear, comprehensive, has a working
reference implementation (if applicable), and is ready for adoption by the Bitcoin community, they may update the BIP’s
status to Preliminary to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation of the BIP. Where applicable, the

> author must ensure that any proposed specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author must ensure that any proposed specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, the
```

BIP’s content should only be adjusted in minor details, e.g. to improve language, clarify ambiguities, backfill
omissions in the specification, add test vectors for edge-cases, or address other issues discovered as the BIP is
adopted.

A Preliminary BIP can only move to Active or to Abandoned. Any necessary changes to the specification should be

> minimal and interfere as little as possible with on-going or concluded adoption. If a Preliminary BIP is found to need

Reviewer: 3 hyphens to be removed here and in the preceding paragraph:

- net-improvement
- edge-cases
- on-going

What is "concluded adoption"?

Author: Changed to:

```suggestion
minimal and interfere as little as possible with on going adoption. If a Preliminary BIP is found to need
```

substantial functional changes, it may be preferable to move it to Abandoned, and to draft a new BIP with the changes
instead.

#### Active

At the earliest, three months after a BIP has been moved to Preliminary, a BIP may be advanced to Active upon request by
any community member with evidence that the idea described in the BIP is in active use. Such evidence includes
for example: two or more projects having deployed support for the BIP in mainnet software releases, a soft fork
proposal’s activation criteria having been met on the network, or rough consensus for the BIP having been demonstrated.

> At that point, the BIP should be considered final and any breaking changes to the BIP should be proposed as a new

Reviewer: Is it necessary to change the name from Final to Active? (churn avoidance)

It may be helpful to clarify what type of edits are allowed to final/active BIPs (only skimmed so far, so I may not have seen it).

Author: BIP 2 permits both Active and Final but considers them more or less equivalent. My thinking is that "Final" could refer to a BIP that is no longer in use or relevant, whereas an "Active" BIP  indicates that it is in use and one property of such a BIP is that it should be "final" in that no breaking changes to the specification should be allowed at that point.

* Proposal is of general interest and/or pertains to more than one Bitcoin project/implementation
* Document is properly formatted
* Licensing terms are acceptable
* Motivation, Rationale, and Backwards Compatibility have been addressed (where applicable)
* The defined Layer header must be correctly assigned for the given specification
* The BIP is ready: it is complete, comprehensible, and technically feasible

Editors do NOT evaluate whether the proposal is likely to be adopted.

A BIP editor will:

* Assign a BIP number in the pull request
* Merge the pull request when it is ready
* List the BIP in the [README](README.mediawiki)

The BIP editors are intended to fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. The BIP editors monitor BIP
changes, and update BIP headers as appropriate.

BIP editors may also, at their option, unilaterally make and merge strictly editorial changes to BIPs, such as
correcting misspellings, fixing broken links, etc. as long as they do not change the meaning or conflict with the
original intent of the author.

## Backwards Compatibility

### Changes from BIP 2

- Refer to the proponent of a BIP as "author" throughout the document

> - The Standards Track type is superseded by the similar Specification type[^standard-track]

Reviewer: I'm not sure what value is brought by this renaming. Is the idea to make this track more flexible, e.g. with respect to policy inter-op? If yes, should there instead be a separate track? (I'm not suggesting that I have the answers. I'll mull over this.)

Author: See the corresponding footnote:

> The definitions of Informational and Standards Track BIPs caused some confusion in the past. Due to Informational BIPs being described as optional, Standards Track BIPs were sometimes misunderstood to be generally recommended. This has led to a number of BIPs that propose new features affecting interoperability of implementations being assigned the Informational type. We remedy this situation by introducing a new _Specification BIP_ type that is inclusive of any BIPs that can be implemented and affect interoperability of Bitcoin applications. Since all BIPs are individual recommendations by the authors (even if some may eventually achieve endorsement by the majority of the community), the prior reminder that Informational BIPs are optional is dropped.

There have been some discussions about policy, but more bothersome is that we have a number of "Informational" BIPs that actually describe an optional standard. This seems to be caused by the description of BIP types in BIP 2, and a clean break by introducing a new type to introduce a new definition seemed more achievable than trying to converge on a shared definition of "Standard" with some people.

- Layer header is no longer restricted to Standards Track, but remains optional as it does not make sense for all BIPs[^layer]
- The comment system is abolished. Comments-URI and Comment-Summary headers are dropped from the preamble, Comments as
  an aspect of the process are discontinued[^comments]
- Process BIPs are living documents that do not ossify and may be modified indefinitely
- The Discussions-To header is dropped, as it has never been used in any BIP
- The Status field is no longer modeled around the workflow of consensus changes.
- Status field values are reduced from nine to four:  
  - Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn are gathered up into Abandoned[^abandoned]

>   - Proposed is renamed to Preliminary

Reviewer: What value is added by this renaming?  Proposed also makes more sense, I think. Preliminary is less clear and seems less applicable to this process; it is more of a preamble.

Author: As one of our colleagues pointed out, every Bitcoin Improvement _Proposal_ is _proposed_ at all times. I guess the repetition of the term irks some.

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 2024-05-13
License: CC0-1.0
Replaces: 2

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Requires: 123
```

Author: Taken

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs, and policies relating to
the publication of BIPs. It replaces BIP 2 with a trimmed process, and may be amended to address future needs of the BIP

> process.

Reviewer 3: style suggestion:
```suggestion
This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs, and policies relating to
the publication of BIPs. It replaces BIP 2 with a streamlined process, and may be amended to address future needs of the BIP
process.
```

Author: Taken

BIPs cover the range of interests of the Bitcoin community. The main topic is technology that supports the bitcoin
currency. However, any topics related to the Bitcoin protocol, Bitcoin’s P2P network, and Bitcoin client software may be

> acceptable. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.

Reviewer 3: I think this paragraph should be moved to "What is a BIP?" and possibly merged with text there a bit.

Author: Done

The BIPs repository serves as a highly visible platform[^blog-posts] to put forward mature proposals. The repository’s
visibility facilitates the distributed consideration of proposals by establishing the current state of the proposal. The
repository’s versioning of the text-based BIPs retains the historical record of each proposal. The BIPs repository does
not aim to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to facilitate a quick overview

> of BIP statuses (see below) to repository visitors.

Reviewer 3: This could go after "What is a BIP?" with a separate title, e.g., "What is the role of the BIPs repository?" 

style suggestions:
```suggestion
The BIPs repository serves as a highly visible platform[^blog-posts] to put forward mature proposals. The repository’s
visibility facilitates the distributed consideration of BIPs by establishing their current states. The
repository’s versioning of the text-based BIPs retains the historical record of each proposal. The BIPs repository does
not aim to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to facilitate a quick overview
of BIP statuses (see below) to repository visitors.
```

*  "The repository’s visibility facilitates the distributed consideration of proposals" I get this part, but I don't get "by establishing the current state"  
* "The repository's versioning" What versioning? Git? "text-based": True, but I think that's implied.
* Another (maybe obvious) purpose of the repo is simply to serve as an archive.

Author: > I get this part, but I don't get "by establishing the current state"

I meant that it’s an established source to find the latest version of a BIP and therefore ensures that the distributed discussion converges on the same object

Changed to:

> The BIPs repository serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals. The repository’s visibility facilitates the distributed consideration of BIPs by providing an established source to retrieve the latest versions of BIPs. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and allows anyone to easily retain a complete copy of the archive. The BIPs repository does not aim to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to provide a quick overview of BIP statuses (see below) to visitors.

## What is a BIP?

Most BIPs provide a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept, feature, or standard. Some BIPs
describe processes, implementation guidelines, best practices, incident reports (e.g. [BIP 50](bip-0050.mediawiki), or
other information relevant to the Bitcoin community.

BIPs are intended to be the primary mechanism for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and

> documenting design decisions that have gone into Bitcoin implementations. Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors,
```

Otherwise, it sounds like only implementations of the protocol are covered (and not implementations of other Bitcoin-related software).

Author: Taken

and represents the authors’ opinion or recommendation. The authors are expected to foster discussion, address feedback
and dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance adoption of their proposal within the Bitcoin community.

### What is the significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what Bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent Bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendations by the BIP author to the Bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or multiple implementations or even
incorporated into the Bitcoin protocol.

> ### What should be documented in a BIP?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### What is the scope of the BIPs repository?
```

The BIPs repository is focused on information and technologies that support and expand the utility of the bitcoin

> currency.[^astroturfing]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The scope of the BIPs repository is limited to BIPs that support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
currency.[^astroturfing]
```
"focused" is a bit weak, hm? On what grounds would you reject BIPs that are not in the focus?

* s/BIPs that support .../BIPs that aim to support.../ ? Whether they actually support bitcoin is too opinionated a question.

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

> BIPs should be written in mediawiki or markdown format.

Reviewer 3: Which flavor of markdown and mediawiki? Is github flavored markdown allowed or not?

Author: I have added a footnote recommending to stick to basic syntax features that are commonly shared across Markdown dialects, but I’m open to amend the recommendation if anyone has convincing arguments.

> Each BIP should have the following parts:

Reviewer 3: I feel some of this is too much hand-holding of the authors. I guess really mandatory should only be:
 - Preamble
 - Copyright
 - Abstract

If appropriate for the topic of the BIP, all the other listed issues should be **addressed** in the BIP, but these don't need to be a separate part of the document (such as a section). I feel we should leave these basic presentation issues to authors. (For example, rationale for design decisions is important, but it does not need to be in a separate section.) I think this is also common practice already now.

Author: I went with your recommendation in requiring Preamble, Abstract, and Copyright only, and making the rest optional.

* Preamble -- Headers containing metadata about the BIP (see the section [BIP header preamble](#bip-header-preamble)
  below).

> * Abstract -- A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Abstract -- A short description of the technical issue being addressed.
```
Will you count words? This should be up to the author.

* Specification -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The
  specification should be detailed enough to enable any Bitcoin project to create an interoperable implementation.
* Rationale -- The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular
  design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work. The rationale
  should address important objections or concerns raised during discussion.
* Backwards compatibility -- BIPs must include a section describing any backwards incompatibilities and their severity.
  The BIP must explain how implementors/users should deal with these incompatibilities.
* Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors and documentation must be
  completed before the BIP can be given status "Preliminary". Any or all of these can be provided either in the BIP or as
  auxiliary files. It is recommended to focus on specification and rationale before writing code.
* Change Log -- An optional section to track modifications to a BIP after reaching Preliminary status.

> * Footnotes -- A collection of footnotes cited in the BIP, and a place to list non-inline hyperlink targets

Reviewer 3: Hm, these are rendered as proper footnotes in markdown, so there's no need to have this in a section. Maybe this can just be dropped, it's very technical already now, and making it depend on whether the BIP is markdown or mediawiki would just make it worse.

Author: Dropped the footnote section from this description

* Copyright -- The BIP must be placed under an acceptable license ([see BIP Licensing below](#bip-licensing)).

Some sections may not be necessary for all BIPs. When in doubt, a section should be included and briefly state how its
topic has been sufficiently addressed.

#### BIP header preamble

Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822 style header preamble. The headers must appear in the following order. Headers
marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required.

```
  BIP: <BIP number, or "?" before being assigned>
* Layer: <Consensus (soft fork) | Consensus (hard fork) | Peer Services | API/RPC | Applications>

>   Title: <BIP title; maximum 44 characters>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Title: <BIP title; maximum 44 characters>
```
I don't think a hard limit makes sense. Perhaps something like "ideally under 50 characters" but if someone wants 52, are we going to waste our time on insisting? This should ultimately be the decision of the author, and the author should (as for every other part of the BIP), address feedback on it.

Reviewer: No strong opinion, but for context it is possible this limit (and other formatting) was inspired by https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/#what-belongs-in-a-successful-pep.

Reviewer: i.e. `a short descriptive title (limited to a maximum of 44 characters), the names, and optionally the contact info for each author, etc.`

Author: I don’t have a strong opinion on this one either, but it seems useful for BIPs to have an explicitly limited length title, given that they frequently appear in lists and other documentation. I raised the recommendation to a maximum of 50.

>   Author: <list of authors’ names and email addresses>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Author: <list of authors’ names or pseudonyms and email addresses>
```
specify the format (e.g., with an example) ? 

edit: Oh I see, this is explain below. I suggest to add "(see below)" to all items explained below.

Author: Almost all of them are further explained below, is it possible that the "see below" is unnecessary when reading the document rather than reviewing the markdown?

Author: I added the hint "The overview is followed by explanations for each header."

  Status: <Draft | Preliminary | Active | Abandoned>
  Type: <Specification | Informational | Process>
  Created: <date the BIP was assigned a number, in ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format>

>   License: <abbreviation for approved license(s)>

Reviewer 3: abbreviation -> [SPDX License Identifier](https://spdx.org/licenses/) ?

Author: Update the description of Licenses to refer to the SPDX

* License-Code: <abbreviation for code under different approved license(s)>
* Discussion: <list of mailing list threads, or other noteworthy discussions in "date: link" format>
* Requires: <BIP number(s)>
* Replaces: <BIP number>
* Superseded-By: <BIP number>
```

__BIP__: BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. The proposal must not self-assign a BIP number. Numbers are
assigned by BIP Editors.

__Layer__: The Layer header documents which layer of Bitcoin the BIP applies to. See [BIP 123](bip-0123.mediawiki) for
definitions of the various BIP layers.

__Authors__: The authors header lists the names and email addresses of the current proponents of the BIP. This may or
may not be the original authors of the BIP. The format of each authors header value must be

    Random J. User <address@dom.ain>

If there are multiple authors, each should be on a separate line following [RFC
2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) continuation line conventions.

__Type__: The Type header specifies the type of BIP: Specification, Informational, or Process.

__Created__: The Created header records the date that the BIP was assigned a number.

> __Discussion__: Discussion is used to record when new versions of the BIP are posted to bitcoin mailing lists. Dates

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
__Discussion__: Discussion is used to record when new versions of the BIP are posted to bitcoin mailing lists. Dates
```
 - Just when or also where? :) (Is it important to have the date here? What's the purpose? Any link to a resource will probably also reveal the date of posting anyway.)
 - Mailing lists or also other places? (e.g. Delving)

Author: I rewrote the description of the Discussion header:

> __Discussion__: The Discussion header is used to point the audience to relevant discussions of the BIP, e.g. the mailing list thread in which the idea for the BIP was discussed, a thread where a new version of the BIP draft was presented, or relevant disussion threads on other platforms. Entries take the format "yyyy-mm-dd: link", e.g. `2009-09-09: https://www.mail-archive.com/cryptography@metzdowd.com/msg10142.html`.

should be in yyyy-mm-dd format, e.g. 2001-08-14. Discussion is permitted to be a link to a specific thread in a
mailing list archive.

__Requires__: BIPs may have a Requires header, indicating the BIP numbers that this BIP depends on.

__Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Superseded-By header indicating that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by a
later document; the value is the number of the BIP that replaces the current document. The newer BIP must have a
Replaces header containing the number of the BIP that it rendered obsolete.

#### Auxiliary Files

BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory for that BIP named

> `bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number. File names in the subdirectory do not need to adhere to a specific

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number padded to four digits. File names in the subdirectory do not need to adhere to a specific
```

convention.

### BIP types

> * A **Specification BIP** defines a set of rules to enable a new feature or protocol change that affects the
>   interoperability of applications using Bitcoin. The distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be
>   implemented, and applications using Bitcoin can be compliant with it. Specification BIPs must contain a specification
>   section as well as contain or link to a reference implementation.
> * An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines, or other information to the
>   Bitcoin community, but does not propose a new feature.

Reviewer 3: Let me try to rewrite these entirely:

```suggestion
* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules affecting the
  interoperability of implementations. The distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be
  implemented, and implementations can be compliant with it. Specification BIPs should come with or refer to a reference implementation.
* An **Informational BIP** describes a design issue, provides general guidelines, or other information to the
  Bitcoin community.
```

Author: Thanks, I like your variant, taken.

* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding Bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to areas other than the Bitcoin protocol itself. They may propose an
  implementation, but not to Bitcoin's codebase; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they
  are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures,

>   guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process. Any meta-BIP is also considered a Process BIP.

Reviewer 3: What's a meta-BIP?

Author: No idea, that’s inherited from BIP 2. I removed this sentence.

brought up to the relevant project directly.

The author should first research whether an idea has been considered before. Ideas in Bitcoin are often rediscovered,
and prior related discussions may inform the author what issues may arise in its progression. After some investigation,
the novelty of an idea can be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin development mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev).

Vetting an idea publicly before investing the time to formally describe the idea is meant to save both the author and
the broader community time. Not only may someone point out relevant discussion topics that were missed in the author’s
research, or that an idea is guaranteed to be rejected based on prior discussions, but describing an idea publicly also
tests whether it is of interest to more people beside the author. After establishing that the idea may be of interest
to the Bitcoin community, the author should work on drafting a BIP.

It is highly recommended that a single BIP contain a single key proposal or new idea. The more focused the BIP, the more

> successful it tends to be. If in doubt, split your BIP into several well-focused ones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
successful it tends to be. If in doubt, the BIP should be separated into several well-focused ones.
```
(The rest of the text does not address the reader directly.)

Maybe add: "in particular if it may help the reuse of subcomponents of the idea."

Reviewer: Agree with `s/split/separate/`

In general, I prefer the simpler, direct active voice ("split") over the heavier, passive one ("it should be split").

Author: Edited this sentence to not directly address the reader

    another currency are not on-topic.
[^standard-track]: **Why was the Specification type introduced?**  
    The definitions of Informational and Standards Track BIPs caused some confusion in the past. Due to Informational
    BIPs being described as optional, Standards Track BIPs were sometimes misunderstood to be generally recommended.
    This has led to a large number of BIPs that define new features that affect interoperability of implementations
    being assigned the Informational type. We remedy this situation by introducing a new _Specification BIP_ type that
    is inclusive of any BIPs that can be implemented and affect interoperability of Bitcoin applications. Since all BIPs
    are individual recommendations by the authors (even if some may eventually achieve endorsement by the majority of
    the community), the prior reminder that Informational BIPs are optional is dropped.
[^blog-posts]: **Why do we not just publish blog posts?**  
    By curating, collecting, and publishing a broad range of ideas in one place, we ensure that knowledge of past ideas

>     is not lost in time.

Reviewer 3: I think that the answer to this question is sufficiently obvious, so the footnote could be dropped.

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 2024-05-13
License: BSD-2-Clause
Requires: 123

> Replaces: 2

Reviewer 4: I think we also want to put a "Superseded-by" in BIP2

Author: While that’s the intended outcome, I think it would be more appropriate to set BIP 2 to superseded with the same pull request that sets this BIP to Active.

```

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs and policies relating to

> the publication of BIPs. It replaces BIP 2 with a streamlined process, and may be amended in the future to address the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the publication of BIPs. It replaces BIP 2 with a streamlined process and may be amended to address the
```

evolving needs of the BIP process.

The BIPs repository serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals. The repository’s visibility
facilitates the distributed consideration of BIPs by providing an established source to retrieve the latest versions of
BIPs. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and allows any community member to easily retain a
complete copy of the archive.

The BIPs repository does not aim to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to
provide a quick overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to visitors.

## Motivation

BIP 2 is over eight years old and was written when different concerns were pressing to the Bitcoin community. The BIP 2

> process seems to have been fashioned to facilitate design and activation of protocol changes. In the past years, BIPs

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
process seems to have been fashioned to facilitate the design and activation of protocol changes. In the past years, BIPs
```

more often describe interoperable features beyond the base protocol. We have had multiple debates about the role of
BIP Editors, and some aspects of the process specified by BIP 2 that did not seem to achieve the intended goal. This
proposal sunsets aspects of the BIP 2 process that did not achieve broad adoption, reduces the judgment calls assigned

> the BIP Editor role, and delineates the BIP Types more expediently.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to the BIP Editor role, and delineates the BIP Types more expediently.
```

Reviewer: @murchandamus did you miss this in the last push (edit: also s/Types/types/?)

## What is a BIP?

BIPs cover the range of interests of the Bitcoin community. The main topic is technology that supports the bitcoin
currency. Most BIPs provide a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept, feature, or standard.
Some BIPs describe processes, implementation guidelines, best practices, incident reports (e.g.
[BIP 50](bip-0050.mediawiki)), or other information relevant to the Bitcoin community. However, any topics related to

> the Bitcoin protocol, Bitcoin’s P2P network, and Bitcoin client software may be acceptable.

Reviewer: nit, perhaps write P2P out as "peer-to-peer"

BIPs are intended to be the primary mechanism for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and

> documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors, and

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
documenting design decisions that have been implemented. Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors and
```

Author: "gone into implementations" feels like a better fit for what I want to express here; removed the comma

Reviewer: agree; drop the comma

represents the authors’ opinion or recommendation. The authors are expected to foster discussion, address feedback and

> dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance adoption of their proposal within the Bitcoin community. BIPs may be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance the adoption of their proposal within the Bitcoin community. BIPs may be
```

submitted by anyone.

### What is the significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what Bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent Bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendation by the BIP author to the Bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by several implementations. Some may even be

> incorporated into the Bitcoin protocol.

Reviewer 6: This begs the question: who or what defines "the" Bitcoin protocol, if it isn't the BIP process?

Suggestion:

> Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or more Bitcoin clients or other related software. Some may even end up changing the consensus rules that the Bitcoin ecosystem jointly enforces.

### What is the scope of the BIPs repository?

The BIPs repository is focused on information and technologies that aim to support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
currency. Related topics that are of interest to the Bitcoin community may be acceptable. Proposals that are in direct
contradiction to this mission, e.g. by undermining fungibility, facilitating unrelated protocols, using Bitcoin for data

> storage, or hobbling mining decentralization, may be considered out-of-scope.

Reviewer 4: I would recommend updating this to something like
```suggestion
currency. Related topics that are of interest to the Bitcoin community may be acceptable. Proposals that are in direct
contradiction to this mission, e.g. with a primary purpose to undermine fungibility, facilitate unrelated protocols, use Bitcoin for data
storage, or hobble mining decentralization, may be considered out-of-scope.
```

The reason being that there have been (and will continue to be) proposals for things that as a secondary or tertiary effect might hit one of these out-of-scope topics. For example, if certain covenant proposals impact miner incentives, or if BIP-341 makes it easier to store data. In these cases, the proposal itself should be considered in-scope, and it should be up to the proposer and the community to address those concerns

Author: Given that it already says "_may_ be considered out-of-scope", I’m not sure this would amount to a significant shift in meaning.

I’ve reformulated this paragraph dozens of times. If you have strong feelings about this section, I’m open to discuss a more drastic rephrasing than that. As a litmus test, it seems to me that e.g. OpenTimestamps or colored coins would not be in scope, a payment protocol like the Lightning network should be on topic, and I can argue either way for Liquid or Taproot Assets. If you have a suggestion for objective criteria to delineate the scope, I’m all ears.

Reviewer: It may be best to avoid the question of interpreting intentions (e.g. "primary purpose").

Reviewer: In other words, POSIWID.

> storage, or hobbling mining decentralization, may be considered out-of-scope.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The BIPs repository is focused on information and technologies that aim to support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
currency. Related topics that are of interest to the Bitcoin community may be acceptable. Proposals that are in direct
contradiction to this mission, e.g. by undermining fungibility, facilitating unrelated protocols, using Bitcoin for data
storage, or hobbling mining decentralization, will be considered out-of-scope.
```

Author: I’ve been going back and forth on this paragraph a lot. Could you please motivate this change and provide reasoning for it?

Reviewer 5: It seems to me that if a proposal _really is_ in direct contradiction to the mission, why wouldn't it be considered out of scope? Is it possible for a proposal to be in direct contradiction but still in scope?

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

BIPs should be written in mediawiki or markdown[^markdown] format.

> Each BIP must have a Preamble, an Abstract, a Copyright section, and a Backwards Compatibility section. Authors should

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Each BIP must have a _Preamble_, an _Abstract_, a _Copyright_, and a _Backwards Compatibility_ section. Authors should
```
Throughout the doc, "backward" seems preferrable to "backwards" to me, but that's probably because "backward" is more common in American English, while "backwards" is more British English.

Author: I’ve added the italicization and changed to "Backward Compatibility" throughout the document

consider all issues in the following list and address each as appropriate. For some BIPs, some concerns may not warrant
a dedicated section.

* Preamble -- Headers containing metadata about the BIP (see the section [BIP header preamble](#bip-header-preamble)
  below).
* Abstract -- A short description of the technical issue being addressed.
* Motivation -- The motivation is critical for BIPs. It should clearly explain what issue the BIP addresses, and how the
  existing situation is inadequate to address the problem that the BIP solves.
* Specification -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The
  specification should be detailed enough to enable any Bitcoin project to create an interoperable implementation.
* Rationale -- The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular
  design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work. The rationale

>   should address important objections or concerns raised during discussion.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  should address important objections or concerns raised.
```

* Backwards compatibility -- BIPs must include a section describing any backwards incompatibilities and their severity.
  The BIP must explain how implementers/users should deal with these incompatibilities.

> * Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors and documentation must be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors, and documentation must be
```

>   completed before the BIP can be given status "Ready". Any or all of these can be provided either in the BIP or as

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  completed before the BIP can be given the status "Ready". Any or all of these can be provided either in the BIP or as
```

>   auxiliary files. It is recommended to focus on specification and rationale before writing code.

Reviewer 6: > It is recommended to focus on specification and rationale before writing code.

Unsure about this. Depending on the type of idea, it may well be impossible to write a full specification before having some (prototype) code at least.

Author: This sentence was adapted from BIP 2, but you raise a fair point. I dropped it.

> * Change Log -- A section to track modifications to a BIP after reaching Ready status.

Reviewer 6: Nit: I don't think I've ever seen this term spelled with a space, and it seems wikipedia also prefers the spelling "changelog": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Changelog, as does https://keepachangelog.com/.

* Copyright -- The BIP must be placed under an acceptable license ([see BIP Licensing below](#bip-licensing)).

#### BIP header preamble

> Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822 style header preamble. The headers must appear in the following order. Headers

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822-style header preamble. The headers must appear in the following order. Headers
```

> marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required. The overview is followed by explanations for each header.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required. The overview is followed by an explanation for each header.
```

  Author: <list of authors’ names and email addresses>
  Status: <Preliminary | Ready | Active | Abandoned>
  Type: <Specification | Informational | Process>
  Created: <date the BIP was assigned a number, in ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format>
  License: <SPDX License Identifier of approved license(s)>
* License-Code: <SPDX License Identifier for Code under different approved license(s)>
* Discussion: <list of mailing list threads, or other noteworthy discussions in "date: link" format>
* Revision: Version number of this document after a Change Log has been introduced
* Requires: <BIP number(s)>
* Replaces: <BIP number>
* Superseded-By: <BIP number>
```

__BIP__: BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. The proposal must not self-assign a BIP number. Numbers are
assigned by BIP Editors.

__Layer__: The Layer header documents which layer of Bitcoin the BIP applies to. See [BIP 123](bip-0123.mediawiki) for
definitions of the various BIP layers.

__Title__: A short descriptive title. Strongly preferred to be less than 50 characters long.

__Author__: The author header lists the names (or pseudonyms) and email addresses of the current proponents of the BIP.

> This may or may not be the original authors of the BIP. The format of each authors header value must be

Reviewer 6: Grammar nit: author's

> This may or may not be the original authors of the BIP. The format of each authors header value must be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This may or may not be the original authors of the BIP. The format of each author header value must be
```

Author: Went with Larry’s suggestions

__Revision__: The Revision header indicates the version of this BIP after a Change Log section has been added.

__Requires__: BIPs may have a Requires header to indicate existing BIPs the new proposal depends on.

__Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Superseded-By header indicating that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by a
later document; the value is the number of the BIP that replaces the current document. The newer BIP must have a
Replaces header containing the number of the BIP that it rendered obsolete.

#### Auxiliary Files

BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory for that BIP named
`bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number zero-padded to four digits. File names in the subdirectory do not need to adhere to a specific
convention.

### BIP types

* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules affecting the interoperability of implementations. The
  distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be implemented, and implementations can be compliant with
  it. Specification BIPs should come with or refer to a reference implementation.

> * An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines, or other information to the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines or other information to the
```
("provides" covers "other information")

  Bitcoin community.
* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding Bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process

>   BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to areas other than the Bitcoin protocol itself. They may propose an

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  BIPs are like Specification BIPs but apply to areas other than the Bitcoin protocol itself. They may propose an
```

>   implementation, but not to Bitcoin's codebase; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they

Reviewer 6: What is "Bitcoin"'s codebase?

Author: Good point, this will need to be amended. I have a bit of a Chesterton’s fence issue here: I am not aware of applications for Process BIPs other than to regulating interactions with the BIP repository or directing protocol development. I’m wondering whether this was intended to refer to software that would inform protocol development decisions like?

Leaving this open to get back to.

Author: I changed this section by dropping the part about proposing an implementation:

```diff
 * A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
-  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to areas other than the bitcoin protocol itself. They may propose an
-  implementation, but not to bitcoin's codebase; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they
-  are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures,
-  guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process.
+  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to areas other than the bitcoin protocol and bitcoin implementations. They
+  often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are
+  typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures, guidelines, and changes to the decision-making
+  process.
```

  are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures,
  guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process.

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for Bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have an author (or multiple
authors)—someone who writes the BIP, gathers feedback, shepherds the discussion in the appropriate forums, and
finally recommends a mature proposal to the community.

![Status Diagram](bip-update-process/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

### Ideation

> After having an idea, the author should evaluate whether it is meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After having an idea, the author should evaluate whether it meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in
```

this BIP. The idea must be of interest to the broader community or relevant to multiple software projects. Small
improvements and matters concerning only a single project usually do not require standardization and should instead be
brought up to the relevant project directly.

The author should first research whether an idea has been considered before. Ideas in Bitcoin are often rediscovered,
and prior related discussions may inform the author what issues may arise in its progression. After some investigation,
the novelty of an idea can be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin development mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev).

Vetting an idea publicly before investing the time to formally describe the idea is meant to save both the author and
the broader community time. Not only may someone point out relevant discussion topics that were missed in the author’s
research, or that an idea is guaranteed to be rejected based on prior discussions, but describing an idea publicly also

> tests whether it is of interest to more people beside the author. After establishing that the idea may be of interest

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
tests whether it is of interest to more people besides the author. After establishing that the idea may be of interest
```

to the Bitcoin community, the author should work on drafting a BIP.

It is recommended that complicated proposals be split into separate BIPs that each focus on a specific component of the
overall proposal.

### Progression through BIP Statuses

As the first draft is taking shape, the author should present it to the [Bitcoin development mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev). This gives the author a chance to collect initial feedback and address
fundamental concerns. If the author wishes to work in public on the draft at this stage, it is recommended that they

> open a pull request against their personal fork of the BIPs repository instead of the main BIPs repository.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
open a pull request against their fork of the BIPs repository instead of the main BIPs repository.
```

The following sections refer to BIP Status Field values. The BIP Status Field is defined in the Header Preamble
specification above.

#### Preliminary

After fleshing out the draft further and ensuring that it is of high quality and properly formatted, the author should
open a pull request to the [BIPs repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). The draft BIP must adhere to the

> formatting requirements specified below and named with a working title of the form "bip-title". The author must not

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
formatting requirements specified below and be named with a working title of the form "bip-title". The author must not
```

self-assign a number to the BIP draft.

BIPs that (1) adhere to the formatting requirements, (2) are on-topic, and (3) have materially progressed
beyond the ideation phase, e.g. by generating substantial public discussion and commentary from diverse contributors, by

> independent Bitcoin projects working on adopting the proposal, or by the author working for an extended period of time

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
independent Bitcoin projects working on adopting the proposal, or by the author working for an extended time
```

Author: I don’t think this matches what I’m trying to express.

Reviewer 5: It's just a nit (for me, at least) that "period of time" seems redundant. Maybe "an extended period" then? Or just leave it, it's not important.

towards improving the proposal based on community feedback, will be assigned a number by a BIP editor. The BIP editors

> should delay number assignment when they perceive a BIP draft being met with comprehensive lack of interest: number

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
should delay number assignment when they perceive a BIP draft being met with a comprehensive lack of interest: number
```

Author: Changed to "met with lack of interest"

> assignment facilitates the distributed discussion of ideas, but before a BIP garners some interest of the Bitcoin

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
assignment facilitates the distributed discussion of ideas, but before a BIP garners some interest in the Bitcoin
```

community, there is no need to refer to it by a number.

BIP drafts are also not eligible for number assignment if they duplicate efforts, disregard formatting rules, are too
unfocused or too broad, fail to provide proper motivation, fail to address backwards compatibility, or fail to specify
the feature clearly and completely. Reviewers and BIP editors should provide guidance on how the draft may

> be improved to progress towards readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious ideas, or have

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
be improved to progress toward readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious ideas or have
```

stopped to make progress may be closed.

> When the BIP draft is complete, a BIP editor will assign a BIP type, and merge it to the BIPs repository.

Reviewer 6: "assign a BIP type": do you mean number?

Author: No, number assignment was already covered two paragraphs earlier. I did mean that a type would be assigned if it doesn’t have one yet. However, now that the types have been clarified, I would hope that this would simple not be an open question at that point.

Changed:
```diff
-When the BIP draft is complete, a BIP editor will assign a BIP type, and merge it to the BIPs repository.
+When the BIP draft has been assigned a number and is complete, a BIP editor will merge it to the BIPs repository.
```

After the BIP is merged to the repository, its main focus should no longer shift significantly, even while the author
may continue to update the draft as necessary in the git repository. Updates to drafts by the author should also be
submitted as pull requests.

#### Ready[^ready]

When the author is confident that their BIP represents a net improvement, is clear, comprehensive, has a working
reference implementation (if applicable), and is ready for adoption by the Bitcoin community, they may update the BIP’s

> status to Ready to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation of the BIP. Where applicable, the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
status to _Ready_ to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation of the BIP. Where applicable, the
```
Accepting this suggestion may require similar changes elsewhere to be consistent. I'd prefer that any mention of these status values be italicized, but that may be too much change.

Author: I had that in an earlier version, but it was too much visual noise for my taste. I did remove all other uses of the status field values (i.e. every appearance of Ready, Abandoned, Active, and Preliminary refers to the status field value).

author must ensure that any proposed specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, the
BIP’s content should only be adjusted in minor details, e.g. to improve language, clarify ambiguities, backfill
omissions in the specification, add test vectors for edge cases, or address other issues discovered as the BIP is
adopted.

> A Ready BIP can only move to Active or to Abandoned. Any necessary changes to the specification should be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A Ready BIP can only move to Active or Abandoned. Any necessary changes to the specification should be
```

> minimal and interfere as little as possible with on going adoption. If a Ready BIP is found to need

Reviewer 6: Spelling: "ongoing"

> minimal and interfere as little as possible with on going adoption. If a Ready BIP is found to need

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
minimal and interfere as little as possible with ongoing adoption. If a Ready BIP is found to need
```

substantial functional changes, it may be preferable to move it to Abandoned[^new-BIP], and to draft a new BIP with the changes

> instead. Otherwise, it could cause confusion as to what being compliant with the BIP means.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
instead. Otherwise, it could cause confusion as to what BIP-compliance means.
```

Author: Prefer the original.

given in such circumstances. An Active Process BIP may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification
has rough consensus per the same criteria.[^living-documents]

##### Revisions

To help implementers understand updates to a BIP, any changes after it has reached Ready or Active are
tracked with version, date, and description in a Change Log section. The version number is inspired by semantic
versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH). The MAJOR version is incremented if changes to the BIP’s Specification are introduced
that are incompatible with prior versions (which should be an exception after a BIP is Ready, and not happen to a
BIP that is Active). The MINOR version is incremented whenever the specification of the BIP
is changed or extended in a backward-compatible way. The PATCH version is incremented for other changes to the BIP that
are noteworthy (bug fixes, test vectors, important clarifications, etc.). The version should start at 1.0.0 with the
date the BIP was promoted to Ready. An example for a Change Log section can be seen in
[BIP 352](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0352.mediawiki). After a BIP receives a Change Log, the

> Preamble must indcate the latest version in the Revision header.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Preamble must indicate the latest version in the Revision header.
```

progress, sees accumulated feedback unaddressed, or otherwise appears stalled for a year, the community may move the BIP
to Abandoned unless the authors assert that they intend to continue work when contacted.

##### Ready ↦ Abandoned

BIPs that had attained Ready status, i.e. that had been recommended for adoption, may be moved to Abandoned per
the author’s announcement to the Bitcoin Developer Mailing List after not being opposed within 28 days. To successfully
oppose the move, at least one of the opposers must become the new BIP author for the BIP to remain Ready. A BIP
can also be moved to Abandoned by the community, if it has had Ready status for at least one year, there is no
evidence of it being in active use, and its authors do not object or fail to respond, unless a new author volunteers
within four weeks.

##### Active ↦ Abandoned

A BIP may evolve from Active to Abandoned when it is no longer in active use. Any community member may initiate this
Status update by announcing it to the mailing list, and proceed if no objections have been raised for four weeks.

##### Abandoned ↦ Preliminary

> The Abandoned status is generally intended to be the final status for BIPs.

Reviewer 6: Does that mean that "Abandoned ↦ Preliminary" is not allowed, or just not recommended? In case it is the latter, what are its requirements?

Author: This seems to be directly addressed in the remainder of this section: "unless it is obvious that the new attempt is a direct continuation of the prior work". Please let me know if you still feel that this should be improved.

Author: I‘ve amended this passage, please let me know if your concern has been addressed satisfactorily.

this BIP can be observed in [Bitcoin Core’s doc/bips.md
file](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/bips.md).

### Transferring BIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of BIPs to a new author. In general, we would like to retain
the original author as a co-author of the transferred BIP, but that is up to the original author. A good reason to
transfer ownership is because the original author no longer has the time or interest in updating it or following through
with the BIP process, or has fallen off the face of the 'net (i.e. is unreachable or not responding to email). A bad
reason to transfer ownership is because someone doesn't agree with the direction of the BIP. We try to build consensus
around a BIP, but if that's not possible, rather than fighting over control, the dissenters should supply a competing
BIP.

If someone is interested in assuming ownership of a BIP, they should send an email asking to take over, addressed to the
original author and the BIP editors. If the author does not respond to email in a timely manner, the BIP editors will

> make a unilateral decision (it's not like such decisions can't be reversed :)).

Reviewer 6: Maybe this can be formulated a bit more seriously:

> (of course, such decisions can be reversed if need be).

Author: Changed to:

```diff
-make a unilateral decision (it's not like such decisions can't be reversed :)).
+make a unilateral decision (which may be amended should the original author make a delayed reappearance).
```

The BIP editors subscribe to the Bitcoin development mailing list and watch the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips).
Off-list BIP-related correspondence should be sent (or CC'd) to the BIP editors.

When a new BIP idea is submitted to the mailing list, BIP editors and other community members should comment in regard
to:

* Novelty of the idea
* Viability, utility, and relevance of the concept
* Readiness of the draft
* On-topic for the Bitcoin community

We observe that discussion in pull requests comments can often be hard to follow as feedback gets marked as resolved
when it is addressed by authors. Substantive discussion of ideas may be more accessible to a broader audience on the
mailing list, where it is also more likely to be retained by the community memory.

If the BIP needs more work, an editor should ensure that constructive, actionable feedback is provided to the author for
revision. Once the BIP is fleshed out it should be submitted as a "pull request" to the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips) where it may get further feedback.

For each new BIP draft pull request that comes in, an editor checks the following:

> * Draft has been previously discussed on the Bitcoin development mailing

Reviewer 6: Missing "list" at end of sentence?

* Title accurately describes the content
* Proposal is of general interest and/or pertains to more than one Bitcoin project/implementation
* Document is properly formatted
* Licensing terms are acceptable
* Motivation, Rationale, and Backwards Compatibility have been addressed
* Specification provides sufficient detail for implementation
* The defined Layer header must be correctly assigned for the given specification
* The BIP is fit: it is complete, comprehensible, and technically feasible

Editors do NOT evaluate whether the proposal is likely to be adopted.

A BIP editor will:

* Assign a BIP number and BIP type in the pull request
* Merge the pull request when it is complete
* List the BIP in the [README](README.mediawiki)

The BIP editors are intended to fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. The BIP editors monitor BIP
changes, and update BIP headers as appropriate.

> BIP editors may also, at their option, unilaterally make and merge strictly editorial changes to BIPs, such as

Reviewer 6: Should such editorial changes without author approval increment the "PATCH" version number, and be recorded in the Change Log?

Author: Good point. Yes, if they affect Changelog relevant content.

correcting misspellings, fixing broken links, etc. as long as they do not change the meaning or conflict with the
original intent of the author.

## Backwards Compatibility

> ### Changes from BIP 2

Reviewer 6: Editorial nit: the lines in the enumeration below largely seem to be full sentences, in which case I believe it's better to end them with ".".

Author: My understanding was that punctuation should only be used when items consist of multiple sentences. Punting on that for the moment, will consider more.

Author: I adopted your suggestion.

[^standard-track]: **Why was the Specification type introduced?**  
    The definitions of Informational and Standards Track BIPs caused some confusion in the past. Due to Informational
    BIPs being described as optional, Standards Track BIPs were sometimes misunderstood to be generally recommended.
    This has led to a number of BIPs that propose new features affecting interoperability of implementations
    being assigned the Informational type. We remedy this situation by introducing a new _Specification BIP_ type that
    is inclusive of any BIPs that can be implemented and affect interoperability of Bitcoin applications. Since all BIPs
    are individual recommendations by the authors (even if some may eventually achieve endorsement by the majority of
    the community), the prior reminder that Informational BIPs are optional is dropped.
[^comments]: **Why were comments, Comments-URI, and Comment-Summary removed from the process?**  
    The comments feature saw insignificant adoption. Few BIPs received any comments and barely any more than two with
    only a handful of contributors commenting at all. This led to many situations in which one or two comments ended up

>     sourcing the comment summary. While some of those comments may have been representative of broadly held opinions, it

Reviewer 6: "sourcing" seems unclear to me. How about "dominating"?

    does not appear otherwise in the process description.
[^ready]: **Why has the Proposed status been renamed to Ready?**  
    Some reviewers of this BIP raised that in a process that outlines the workflow of Bitcoin Improvement _Proposals_
    using "Proposed" as a status field value was overloading the term: clearly _proposals_ are proposed at all stages of
    the process.
[^rejection]: **Why can proposals remain in Preliminary or Ready indefinitely?**  
    The automatic 3-year timeout of BIPs has led to some disagreement in the past and seems unnecessary in cases where
    the author is still active in the community and still considers their idea worth pursuing. On the other hand,
    proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year which hopefully achieves the main
    goals of the original rule.
[^abandoned]: **Why was the Abandoned Status introduced?**  
    Previously, we had Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn which all meant some flavor of "work has
    stopped on this". The author of this BIP feels that all of these can be represented by Abandoned without

>     significantly impacting the information quality of the overview table. Where the many Status variants provided

Reviewer 6: Another reason I think is the fact that the many statuses that existed before complicated the process, and it may have been the case that this contributed to a process fatigue resulting in the statuses not being well maintained at all.

Author: Thanks, I adopted your comment into the rationale

    minuscule additional information, the Change Log section now collects specific details per BIP.
[^acceptance]: **Why does the BIPs repository no longer track adoption?**  
    BIP 2 made an attempt to gather community feedback into summaries in BIPs directly. Given the low adoption and
    corresponding low information quality of the summaries that resulted from that feature, this BIP instead intends to
    leave the evaluation of BIPs to the audience.
[^markdown]: **Which flavor of markdown is allowed?**  
    The author of this proposal has no opinion on Markdown flavors, but recommends that proposals stick to the basic
    Markdown syntax features commonly shared across Markdown dialects.
[^living-documents]: **Why are Process BIPs living documents?**  

>     In the past years, the existing BIPs process has not always provided a clear approach to all situations. For

Reviewer 6: If this BIP were to be adopted, and 10 years from now a new effort appears to overhaul the BIP process, proposing a change of the magnitude similar to that between BIP 2 and this document, would you say that warrants a new BIP, or an amendment of this document?

In other words, is there some limit on the magnitude of change for this "living document" rule?

I don't know the right answer here, and obviously this is something to be decided by future generations of contributors to the BIP process.

Author: That’s a valid point, but I’ll have to ponder it more. Will get back to this.

Author: I added a sentence to suggest that modifications should be punctual or limited, and if drastic changes are required, a new BIP should be preferred.

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>

> Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process

Reviewer 3: It could be nice to have:
```
Discussion: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2
```

At least that's how I imagine the new Discussion header to be used, and it will be nice if the header here confirms to this BIP as a usage example and reference. 

(I know, this BIP should conform to BIP 2 instead, but maybe the Editors can be convinced that this BIP here warrants an exception, in particular because Comments-URI is a practically outdated thing anyway. If no exception is granted, this change could probably be done once this BIP becomes Active.)

Author: I added 

```
Post-History: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2
```

to the preamble.

Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 2024-05-13
License: BSD-2-Clause
Requires: 123
Replaces: 2
```

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs and policies relating to

> the publication of BIPs. It replaces BIP 2 with a streamlined process, and may be amended to address the

Reviewer 3: Make "BIP 2" a link?

Author: Added link to BIP 2

> evolving needs of the BIP process.

Reviewer 3: I think this is the only paragraph that belongs in the Abstract. The other two paragraphs could be moved to a new subsection "What is the purpose of the BIPs repository?" or "What is the function of the BIPs repository?" (directly above or below "What is the scope of the BIPs repository?")

Author: Good idea, taken

The BIPs repository serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals. The repository’s visibility
facilitates the distributed consideration of BIPs by providing an established source to retrieve the latest versions of
BIPs. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and allows any community member to easily retain a

> complete copy of the archive.

Reviewer 3: You write "BIPs repository" but "BIP process". I suggest "BIP repository" instead.

---

Just some style suggestions (this sentence felt a bit clumsy), feel free to cherry-pick and ignore. Don't worry, I'll calm down with these in later sections of the draft. :P  

```suggestion
The BIPs repository serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals. Through its high visibility, it
facilitates community-wide consideration of BIPs and provides a well-established source to retrieve the latest version of
any BIP. The repository records all changes to each BIP transparently and allows any community member to easily retain a
complete copy of the archive.
```

edit: I tried to be more verbose about style in the abstract than in the rest of the text, and only then I realized that this paragraph should be moved out of the abstract. Let me keep the style suggestions here nonetheless.

Author: Great suggestion, adopted

The BIPs repository does not aim to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs except to

> provide a quick overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to visitors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The BIPs repository is not a tool to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs, beyond
providing a brief overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below).
```

Author: Wonderful, thanks, taken

## Motivation

> BIP 2 is over eight years old and was written when different concerns were pressing to the bitcoin community. The BIP 2

Reviewer 7: nit: I'm sure this has been discussed somewhere, but why change the spelling in BIP 2 from "Bitcoin" to "bitcoin"?

Reviewer 3: Since this has indeed been discussed above, perhaps it's worth adding a footnote that explains the convention used in this BIP.

Author: Added a footnote

> process seems to have been fashioned to facilitate the design and activation of protocol changes. In the past years, BIPs

Reviewer 3: s/The BIP 2 process/The BIP process as defined in BIP 2 thus far

more often describe interoperable features beyond the base protocol. We have had multiple debates about the role of

> BIP Editors, and some aspects of the process specified by BIP 2 that did not seem to achieve the intended goal. This

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
more often describe interoperable features beyond the base protocol. There had been multiple debates about the role of
BIP Editors, and some aspects of the process specified by BIP 2 that did not seem to achieve the intended goal. This
```

(Who is "we"? Well, I know, my suggestion does not answer it, but I think the answer is not relevant in the end, so passive voice is appropriate here. Could also say "The community" instead if you prefer active voice.)

Author: Okay, changed it to "The community" here, and used either passive voice or similar constructions across the document to avoid "we".

proposal sunsets aspects of the BIP 2 process that did not achieve broad adoption, reduces the judgment calls assigned
to the BIP Editor role, and delineates the BIP Types more expediently.

> ## What is a BIP?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

# Fundamentals

## What is a BIP?
```
Or "Background" or "Introduction" if you want to keep it more generic.

Rationale: I think the following part is no longer "Motivation". You could alternatively make "Motivation" a subsection of whatever the new main section is (but this may violate BIP2 depending on your reading :P), and I don't think it's better.

Author: Sure, good suggestion.

dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance the adoption of their proposal within the bitcoin community. BIPs may be
submitted by anyone.

### What is the significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendation by the BIP author to the bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or more bitcoin clients or other related
software. Some may even end up changing the consensus rules that the bitcoin ecosystem jointly enforces.

### What is the scope of the BIPs repository?

The BIPs repository is focused on information and technologies that aim to support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
currency. Related topics that are of interest to the bitcoin community may be acceptable. Proposals that undermine the
fundamental principle that Bitcoin constitutes a peer-to-peer electronic cash system for the bitcoin currency are
out-of-scope.

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

BIPs should be written in mediawiki or markdown[^markdown] format.

> Each BIP must have a _Preamble_, an _Abstract_, a _Copyright_, and a _Backward Compatibility_ section. Authors should

Reviewer 7: What's the reason for the "Backward Compatibility" section being mandatory? In many cases, BIPs propose an idea for which it is not clear what backward compatibility is supposed to mean as there's no existing way of doing things it could be meaningfully compared to. This seems to be a relic from BIP 2's focus on consensus changes.

For example, BIP 340 ("Schnorr Signatures") doesn't have a backward compatibility section. Also, it's not clear what backward compatibility means for BIP 327 ("MuSig2"), so the section ended up being quite artificial, just to meet the mandatory section requirement:
> This document proposes a standard for the MuSig2 multi-signature scheme that is compatible with [BIP340](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki). MuSig2 is not compatible with ECDSA signatures traditionally used in Bitcoin.

Reviewer 3: Was this just a mistake? @murchandamus said that he'll only keep Preamble, Abstract and Copyright after I suggested to keep just these: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2#discussion_r1759490527

Author: It was reintroduced in 85c4fe54398fa217039bd61fe3573230699309e4, but the commit message doesn’t mention it. I’m not sure why it got added back. Maybe I had changed my mind, in that it is required for many proposals and often neglected. Gonna drop the requirement, though.

  specification should be detailed enough to enable any bitcoin project to create an interoperable implementation.
* Rationale -- The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular
  design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work. The rationale
  should address important objections or concerns raised.
* Backward compatibility -- BIPs must include a section describing any backwards incompatibilities and their severity.
  The BIP must explain how implementers/users should deal with these incompatibilities.
* Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors, and documentation must be
  completed before the BIP can be given the status "Proposed". Any or all of these can be provided either in the BIP or as
  auxiliary files.
* Changelog -- A section to track modifications to a BIP after reaching Proposed status.
* Copyright -- The BIP must be placed under an acceptable license ([see BIP Licensing below](#bip-licensing)).

#### BIP header preamble

> Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822-style header preamble. The headers must appear in the following order. Headers

Reviewer 3: link to RFC?

marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required. The overview is followed by an explanation for each header.

```
  BIP: <BIP number, or "?" before being assigned>
* Layer: <Consensus (soft fork) | Consensus (hard fork) | Peer Services | API/RPC | Applications>
  Title: <BIP title, up to 50 characters>
  Author: <list of authors’ names and email addresses>

>   Status: <Draft | Proposed | Active | Abandoned>

Reviewer: ACK. With respect to the discussion about the different statuses and their naming (and at the risk of glossing over the preceding detailed discussions), ISTM that if the main goal is to simplify and reduce them, then the simplest change and easiest one to switch over to would be what you have here: keep the Draft, Proposed, and Active statuses as-is (without renaming them), and drop the five others in BIP2 (Deferred/Rejected/Withdrawn/Final/Replaced/Obsolete) in favor of Abandoned, provided the finer-grained precision of those five has not added sufficient value to keep them.

Author: Thanks for weighing in, I’m still processing the various inputs from reviewers in regard to the new status field values. I’m collecting the various points of view as I’m going through this iteration of addressing review and will address them all together towards the end of this review processing iteration.

  Type: <Specification | Informational | Process>
  Created: <date the BIP was assigned a number, in ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format>
  License: <SPDX License Identifier of approved license(s)>
* License-Code: <SPDX License Identifier for Code under different approved license(s)>

> * Discussion: <list of mailing list threads, or other noteworthy discussions in "date: link" format>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Discussion: <list of links to mailing list threads, or other noteworthy discussions in "date: URL" format>
```

* Revision: Version number of this document after a Changelog has been introduced
* Requires: <BIP number(s)>
* Replaces: <BIP number>
* Superseded-By: <BIP number>
```

__BIP__: BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. The proposal must not self-assign a BIP number. Numbers are

> assigned by BIP Editors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
__BIP__: BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. The proposal must not self-assign a BIP number. Numbers are
assigned solely by BIP Editors.
```

__Layer__: The Layer header documents which layer of bitcoin the BIP applies to. See [BIP 123](bip-0123.mediawiki) for
definitions of the various BIP layers.

> __Title__: A short descriptive title. Strongly preferred to be less than 50 characters long.

Reviewer 7: nit: Is there a reason for not just saying "Must be" instead of "Strongly preferred to be"? This would also be more consistent with the "up to 50 characters" wording in the other parts of the BIP.

Author: Sure, taken.

__Author__: The author header lists the names (or pseudonyms) and email addresses of the current proponents of the BIP.

> This may or may not be the original authors of the BIP. The format of each author header value must be

Reviewer 3: Perhaps: s/proponent/proposer 
(I think you mean "proponent" here in a narrow technical sense, i.e., "the person who brings forward the proposal". But "proponent" can also mean "advocate", which is broader.)

----

"This may or may not be the original authors of the BIP." I tend to agree others may propose the BIP, but then it's misleading to call it "Authors". I think this is more of an annoyance, since authorship is relevant for copyright. 

We could add a separate field "Proposers" (or "Proponents" or whatever you choose above), or even "Champions", which could be optional if it matches the "Authors" field. It sounds like a clean solution to me, and I lean towards it, but I wonder if it's slight overkill.

    Random J. User <address@dom.ain>

If there are multiple authors, each should be on a separate line following [RFC
2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) continuation line conventions.

__Status__: The Status field can take the four values Draft, Proposed, Active, and Abandoned. The
[Workflow](#workflow) section below describes the statuses in detail.

__Type__: The Type header specifies the type of BIP: Specification, Informational, or Process.

__Created__: The Created header records the date that the BIP was assigned a number.

__License/License-Code__: See the [BIP Licensing](#bip-licensing) section below for a description of the
acceptable Licenses and their SPDX License Identifiers.

__Discussion__: The Discussion header is used to point the audience to relevant discussions of the BIP, e.g. the mailing
list thread in which the idea for the BIP was discussed, a thread where a new version of the BIP was presented, or
relevant discussion threads on other platforms. Entries take the format "yyyy-mm-dd: link", e.g.

> `2009-09-09: https://www.mail-archive.com/cryptography@metzdowd.com/msg10142.html`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`2009-01-09: https://www.mail-archive.com/cryptography@metzdowd.com/msg10142.html`.
```

__Revision__: The Revision header indicates the version of this BIP after a Changelog section has been added.

__Requires__: BIPs may have a Requires header to indicate existing BIPs the new proposal depends on.

__Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Superseded-By header indicating that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by a
later document; the value is the number of the BIP that replaces the current document. The newer BIP must have a
Replaces header containing the number of the BIP that it rendered obsolete.

> #### Auxiliary Files

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Auxiliary files
```

> BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory for that BIP named

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams and source code. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory for that BIP named
```

`bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number zero-padded to four digits. File names in the subdirectory do not need to adhere to a specific
convention.

### BIP types

* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules affecting the interoperability of implementations. The
  distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be implemented, and implementations can be compliant with
  it. Specification BIPs should come with or refer to a reference implementation.

> * An **Informational BIP** describes a bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines or other information to the
>   bitcoin community.
> * A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* An **Informational BIP** describes a bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines, or other information to the
  bitcoin community.
```

Author: @real-or-random: Are you proposing to drop the Process BIP type altogether?

Reviewer 3: No, this comment was a mistake, not sure what I or GitHub did here...

  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to topics other than the bitcoin protocol and bitcoin implementations.
  They often require community consensus, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures,

>   guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process.

Reviewer 3: " and users are typically not free to ignore them"

Hey, I'm free to ignore anything I want. :) Okay, on a more serious note, I'd just drop this part. It doesn't add much. It's also not clear if "users" is the right term, but I don't have a better one.

s/decision-making process/decision-making processes such as the BIP process

Author: How about:

```suggestion
  They often require community consensus, and are typically [binding|authoritative|normative] for the corresponding process. Examples include procedures,
  guidelines, and changes to decision-making processes such as the BIP Process.
```

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have an author (or multiple
authors)—someone who writes the BIP, gathers feedback, shepherds the discussion in the appropriate forums, and

> finally recommends a mature proposal to the community.

Reviewer 3: Note how this is in conflict to the definition of the "Authors" field, which (confusingly) says that the "Authors" don't need to be the ones who write the BIP.

For style reasons, I'd stick with the plural "authors" (or whatever we call this) here and below, simply because the header field also uses the plural. Sure, the list of authors can just contain a single entry, that's fine.

Author: The Header field itself was actually "Author", but was described as "list of authors". I’ve changed the field name to "Authors" and use now the plural throughout the document.

Author: The last part of this is resolved after introducing the "Proponents" header.

![Status Diagram](bip-update-process/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

### Ideation

After having an idea, the author should evaluate whether it meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in
this BIP. The idea must be of interest to the broader community or relevant to multiple software projects. Small
improvements and matters concerning only a single project usually do not require standardization and should instead be
brought up to the relevant project directly.

The author should first research whether an idea has been considered before. Ideas in bitcoin are often rediscovered,
and prior related discussions may inform the author what issues may arise in its progression. After some investigation,
the novelty of an idea can be tested by posting about it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing

> List](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev).

Reviewer 3: It could make sense to add a link to the archive of the old list, so that people have more places to do their research.

Author: Added

```
Prior correspondence can be found in the [mailing list archive](https://gnusha.org/pi/bitcoindev/).
```

Vetting an idea publicly before investing the time to formally describe the idea is meant to save both the author and
the broader community time. Not only may someone point out relevant discussion topics that were missed in the author’s
research, or that an idea is guaranteed to be rejected based on prior discussions, but describing an idea publicly also
tests whether it is of interest to more people besides the author. After establishing that the idea may be of interest
to the bitcoin community, the author should work on drafting a BIP.

It is recommended that complicated proposals be split into separate BIPs that each focus on a specific component of the
overall proposal.

### Progression through BIP Statuses

As a first sketch of the proposal is taking shape, the author should present it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing
List](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev). This gives the author a chance to collect initial feedback and address
fundamental concerns. If the author wishes to work in public on the proposal at this stage, it is recommended that they

> open a pull request against their fork of the BIPs repository instead of the main BIPs repository.

Reviewer 3: I think this paragraph belongs to Ideation. Also, the text could be merged in parts. (For example, the advice to post to the list is duplicated, though with different purposes.

Author: In the ideation phase, the would-be authors are just describing the idea, i.e. work on a proposal document has not started. In the section about Progression through the BIP Statuses, the authors are sending a first draft of the BIP to the mailing list, i.e. we are now talking about work on an actual proposal.

It makes sense to me for the "bouncing around an idea" and "writing a proposal" to be distinct sections, but perhaps the distinction was not clear enough. Does that make sense to you? Do you have suggestions how to clarify the distinction?

Reviewer 3: Okay, what I found confusing is that below "Progression through BIP Statuses", even though it discusses a phase before any BIP status is assigned (and when the authors still work in their own repo). I think the proper way to resolve this is to move this paragraph to "Ideation". 

Then, if you like to distinguish "bouncing around an idea" and "writing a proposal", you could create two subsections of "Ideation". That's okay, but if you ask me, I think that's a tiny bit overkill because we don't need to formalize the Ideation part too much -- it's precisely part of the "official" process. I assume the reason why you talk about it at length is to help authors follow best practices and tell them to do their research upfront. So I think it's just okay that this phase of writing an initial proposal external to the BIPs repo belongs just to "Ideation", with the idea that "Ideation" is simply everthing before the official process. Perhaps there's a bit better term for "Ideation" that captures this writing step, too, but I can't think of one.

Author: Ah gotcha, thanks for elaborating, that makes sense and I followed your advice to move the paragraph to ideation.

The following sections refer to BIP Status Field values. The BIP Status Field is defined in the Header Preamble
specification above.

#### Draft

After fleshing out the proposal further and ensuring that it is of high quality and properly formatted, the author should
open a pull request to the [BIPs repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). The document must adhere to the

> formatting requirements specified below and be named with a working title of the form "bip-title". The author must not

Reviewer 3: `be named with a working title of the form "bip-title"`:
Can't follow. Something "bip-taproot"? Where should this "title" be? (I do not guess in the "Title" field.) Perhaps call it to "slug" instead. But I'm not convinced of the purpose of this thing, can you elaborate?

Author: I believe this was supposed to refer to the filename. I have added a clarification.

beyond the ideation phase, e.g. by generating substantial public discussion and commentary from diverse contributors, by
independent bitcoin projects working on adopting the proposal, or by the author working for an extended period
toward improving the proposal based on community feedback, will be assigned a number by a BIP editor. The BIP editors
should delay number assignment when they perceive a proposal being met with lack of interest: number
assignment facilitates the distributed discussion of ideas, but before a proposal garners some interest in the bitcoin
community, there is no need to refer to it by a number.

Proposals are also not ready for number assignment if they duplicate efforts, disregard formatting rules, are too
unfocused or too broad, fail to provide proper motivation, fail to address backwards compatibility, or fail to specify
the feature clearly and completely. Reviewers and BIP editors should provide guidance on how the proposal may
be improved to progress toward readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious ideas or have
stopped to make progress may be closed.

> When the proposal has been assigned a number and is complete, a BIP editor will merge it to the BIPs repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the proposal has been assigned a number and is complete, a BIP editor will merge it into the BIPs repository.
```

> After the BIP is merged to the repository, its main focus should no longer shift significantly, even while the author

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the BIP has been merged to the repository, its main focus should no longer shift significantly, even while the author
```

> may continue to update the proposal as necessary in the git repository. Updates to merged documents by the author should also be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
may continue to update the proposal as necessary. Updates to merged documents by the author should also be
```
No reason to mention git here if it hasn't been mentioned before. (Let's stay technology-neutral, tools may evolve over time.) You could also say "BIPs repository" but I think it's simpler to drop this part.

submitted as pull requests.

#### Proposed[^proposed]

> When the author is confident that their BIP represents a net improvement, is clear, comprehensive, has a working
> reference implementation (if applicable), and is ready for adoption by the bitcoin community, they may update the BIP’s
> status to Proposed to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation of the BIP. Where applicable, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the author is confident that their BIP represents a net improvement, is clear, comprehensive, has a working
reference implementation (if applicable), and is ready for adoption by the bitcoin community, they may update the BIP’s
status to Proposed to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation of the BIP. Where applicable, the
```

Author: I don’t see a difference between the original and the suggestion. Do you remember what you were trying to suggest here?

Reviewer 3: Nevermind. No idea what I had in mind here.

> author must ensure that any proposed specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, the
> BIP’s content should only be adjusted in minor details, e.g. to improve language, clarify ambiguities, backfill
> omissions in the specification, add test vectors for edge cases, or address other issues discovered as the BIP is
> adopted.

Reviewer 3: Hm, I haven't thought this through entirely, but perhaps this rule is a bit too strict. I think there could be exceptions, e.g., if a bug or vulnerability is found later etc. Perhaps the changes won't be minor details. Perhaps the use of the word "should" expresses the ability for exceptions, but then it may be better to make this more explicit.

style nit:
```suggestion
author must ensure that any proposed specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, the
BIP’s content should only be adjusted in minor details, e.g. to improve language, clarify ambiguities, backfill
omissions in the specification, add test vectors for edge cases, or address other issues discovered as the BIP is
being adopted.
```

Author: I think this is covered sufficiently between "should" and in conjunction with the next paragraph’s "Any necessary changes should be minimal and interfere as little as possible with ongoing adoption". Happy to add a footnote, if you think it’s useful.

Reviewer 3: Agreed.

A Proposed BIP can only move to Active or Abandoned. Any necessary changes to the specification should be
minimal and interfere as little as possible with ongoing adoption. If a Proposed BIP is found to need
substantial functional changes, it may be preferable to move it to Abandoned[^new-BIP], and to start a new BIP with the changes
instead. Otherwise, it could cause confusion as to what being compliant with the BIP means.

#### Active

> A settled[^settled] BIP may be advanced to Active upon request by
> any community member with evidence that the idea described in the BIP is in active use. Such evidence includes
> for example: two or more projects having deployed support for the BIP in mainnet software releases, a soft fork
> proposal’s activation criteria having been met on the network, or rough consensus for the BIP having been demonstrated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A settled[^settled] BIP may be advanced to Active upon request by
any community member with evidence that the idea described in the BIP is in active use. Such evidence includes
for example: one or multiple projects having deployed support for the BIP in mainnet software releases, a soft fork
proposal’s activation criteria having been met on the network, or rough consensus for the BIP having been demonstrated.
```

I know this says "for example" but I'm sure there are cases where one project suffices (e.g., Bitcoin Core) and I want to save the future Editors from arguing about the number of implementations necessary to do the transition

Author: While I agree that in some cases one project might suffice, the example was deliberately suggesting that there should be at least two. Still thinking about it.

Reviewer 3: > While I agree that in some cases one project might suffice, the example was deliberately suggesting that there should be at least two. 

Okay, if you agree, then I feel that the example should be aligned with this. ;)

Author: Changed it to "at least one".

At that point, the BIP should be considered final and any breaking changes to the BIP should be proposed as a new
separate BIP.[^new-BIP]

##### Process BIPs

A Process BIP may change status from Proposed to Active when it achieves rough consensus on the mailing list. Such a
proposal is said to have rough consensus if it has been open to discussion on the development mailing list for at least
one month, and no person maintains any unaddressed substantiated objections to it. Addressed or obstructive objections
may be ignored/overruled by general agreement that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning must be
given in such circumstances. Active Process BIPs may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification
has rough consensus per the same criteria.[^living-documents]

> ##### Revisions

Reviewer 2: I think this should be bumped up to "###" and moved to just before the "Adoption of Proposals" heading. Possibly also name it as "Changelog" instead of "Revisions" ? (Or rename the "Changelog" section as "Revisions"?)

Author: Sure, sounds good. I moved it just before "Adoption of Proposals" bumped it to "###" and renamed it to "Changelog".

> 
> To help implementers understand updates to a BIP, any changes after it has reached Proposed or Active are
> tracked with version, date, and description in a Changelog section. The version number is inspired by semantic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

To help implementers understand updates to a BIP, any changes after it has reached Proposed are
tracked with version, date, and description in a Changelog section. The version number is inspired by semantic
```
There's no way to reach Active without having reached Proposed first.

Author: Technically correct, which is of course the only way to be correct, although I have in practice seen some BIPs skip directly from Draft to Active, because they had long been adopted without anyone bothering to update them to Proposed.

Adopted.

> versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH). The MAJOR version is incremented if changes to the BIP’s Specification are introduced
> that are incompatible with prior versions (which should be an exception after a BIP is Proposed, and not happen to a
> BIP that is Active). The MINOR version is incremented whenever the specification of the BIP

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH). The MAJOR version is incremented if changes to the BIP’s Specification are introduced
that are incompatible with prior versions (which should be rare after a BIP is Proposed, and only happen in well-ground exceptional cases to a
BIP that is Active). The MINOR version is incremented whenever the specification of the BIP
```

Again trying to make this a bit more flexible to give BIP editors the permission to allow for exceptions. Hard to predict what the future brings.

is changed or extended in a backward-compatible way. The PATCH version is incremented for other changes to the BIP that
are noteworthy (bug fixes, test vectors, important clarifications, etc.). The version should start at 1.0.0 with the
date the BIP was promoted to Proposed. An example of a Changelog section can be seen in

> [BIP 352](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0352.mediawiki). After a BIP receives a Changelog, the

Reviewer 3: Ha, except that the section is called "Change Log" and not "Changelog". I prefer the latter. It's really a micro nit, but if we adopt the latter, we may want to change this BIP352 just for reference.

Reviewer: Tend to agree, though for instance https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Style-of-Change-Logs writes them as "change log"...it would be good to settle on one of the two.

I plan to make the existing ones consistent, e.g. per https://keepachangelog.com.

Author: I think it would make sense to make the Changelog sections consistent should this BIP be adopted, but the adherence of BIP 352 to this BIP before this BIP is adopted is a bit out of scope ^^

Preamble must indicate the latest version in the Revision header.

#### Abandoned[^abandoned]

> A BIP that is _not in active use_, may be labeled Abandoned when its author has stopped working on it, no longer
> recommends the proposed approach, or no longer pursues adoption of their completed proposal. The reason for moving the
> proposal to Abandoned should be recorded in the Changelog section in the same commit that updates the status.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A BIP that is _not in active use_ may be labeled Abandoned when its author has stopped working on it, no longer
recommends the proposed approach, or no longer pursues adoption of their completed proposal. The reason for moving the
proposal to Abandoned should be recorded in the Changelog section in the same commit that updates the status.
```

Isn't this paragraph just describing "Draft -> Abandoned" and "Proposed -> Abandoned" but not "Active -> Abandoned"

Author: I think it’s fine. "Not in active use" could be either achieved by _not yet_ being in active use, or _no longer_ being in active use. Happy to adjust if you feel it’s worth clarifying.

Reviewer 3: I think my comment here was about the subsections. "Active -> Draft" is valid transition but it has no subsection mentioning it.

Author: I don’t see how "Active ↦ Draft" (now "Deployed" ↦ "Draft") would be a valid transition. In order for something to have been "Active/Deployed" it was adopted by the community and probably deployed on the network by at least one implementation. Returning to Draft for a significant shift in focus or deliberate breaking changes, would pull the Specification-rug out underneath of implementations deployed to the network. In that case it would be more appropriate to create another proposal, and to move the existing proposal to Closed when it is no longer active on the network.

##### Draft ↦ Abandoned

BIP authors may decide on their own to change their BIP’s status from Draft to Abandoned. If a Draft BIP stops making
progress, sees accumulated feedback unaddressed, or otherwise appears stalled for a year, the community may move the BIP
to Abandoned unless the authors assert that they intend to continue work when contacted.

##### Proposed ↦ Abandoned

> BIPs that had attained Proposed status, i.e. that had been recommended for adoption, may be moved to Abandoned per
> the author’s announcement to the Bitcoin Development Mailing List after not being opposed within 28 days. To successfully
> oppose the move, at least one of the opposers must become the new BIP author for the BIP to remain Proposed. A BIP
> can also be moved to Abandoned by the community if it has had Proposed status for at least one year, there is no
> evidence of it being in active use, and its authors do not object or fail to respond, unless a new author volunteers
> within four weeks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
BIPs that had attained the Proposed status, i.e. that had been recommended for adoption, may be moved to Abandoned per
the author’s announcement to the Bitcoin Development Mailing List after not being opposed within 28 days. To successfully
oppose the move, at least one of the opposers must become the new BIP author for the BIP to remain Proposed. A BIP
can also be moved to Abandoned by the community if it has had Proposed status for at least one year, there is no
evidence of it being in active use, and its authors do not object or fail to respond, unless a new author volunteers
within four weeks.
```

28 days or 4 weeks? I know it's the same, but maybe pick one for consistency.

Author: Sure, four weeks for both.

this BIP can be observed in [Bitcoin Core’s doc/bips.md
file](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/bips.md).

### Transferring BIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of BIPs to a new author. In general, we would like to retain
the original author as a co-author of the transferred BIP, but that is up to the original author. A good reason to
transfer ownership is because the original author no longer has the time or interest in updating it or following through
with the BIP process, or has fallen off the face of the 'net (i.e. is unreachable or not responding to email). A bad
reason to transfer ownership is because someone doesn't agree with the direction of the BIP. We try to build consensus
around a BIP, but if that's not possible, rather than fighting over control, the dissenters should supply a competing
BIP.

If someone is interested in assuming ownership of a BIP, they should send an email asking to take over, addressed to the
original author and the BIP editors. If the author does not respond to email in a timely manner, the BIP editors will

> make a unilateral decision (which may be amended should the original author make a delayed reappearance).

Reviewer 3: Perhaps they should send to the original author and the list? (We use the list for other announcements, so I think it makes sense to use it here too). Perhaps the original  author has simply changed their email address, or someone on the list can point out how to reach the original author.

Want to specify a deadline here too?

Author: Oh yeah, absolutely the list should be part of that process. Thanks for catching that!

> ## BIP Licensing

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should also mandate a section / statement about other IP rights, if applicable. For example, I've seen this in cryptographic "competitions", e.g., CAESAR, whose goal was to find a standard for authenticated encryption:
> Intellectual property: Full disclosure of all known patents, patent applications, planned patent applications, and other intellectual-property constraints relevant to use of the cipher. This section must include the following statement: "If any of this information changes, the submitter/submitters will promptly (and within at most one month) announce these changes on the crypto-competitions mailing list." Note that intellectual-property status will be taken into account in cipher evaluation; patented submissions are permitted, but submitters are advised that patenting a cipher is likely to reduce the level of interest in the cipher.  

See https://competitions.cr.yp.to/caesar-call.html

Reviewer 9: There could be a recommendation to use the GPLv3 or one of its succedaneous. It’s a bit of burn it with fire approach for patent issues that could grieve the free usage of bitcoin standards…so I don’t know if it’s the soundest piece of advice.

I think it would be worthy to have BIP licensing discussed openly on the mailing list in a thread of its own, rather to have this issue withholding the merge of this update to the BIP process. I guess there would be many stakeholders in the bitcoin ecosystem interested to this discussion and willing to put the ressources if there is a need to improve the current license for the BIP standards, myself included.

Author: I don’t feel strongly about this. I’d be happy to consider a concrete suggestion what to add.

Reviewer 3: Let's postpone this issue to another BIP. :P

Author: > Let's postpone this issue to another BIP. :P

Happily!

Each new BIP must identify at least one acceptable license in its preamble. Licenses must be referenced per their
respective [SPDX License identifier](https://spdx.org/licenses). New BIPs may be accepted with the licenses described
below.

For example, a preamble might include the following License header:

    License: CC0-1.0
             GNU-All-Permissive

In this case, the BIP text is fully licensed under both the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal license as well as the
GNU All-Permissive License, and anyone may modify and redistribute the text provided they comply with the terms of
*either* license. In other words, the license list is an "OR choice", not an "AND also" requirement.

It is also possible to license source code differently from the BIP text. An optional License-Code header is placed
after the License header. Again, each license must be referenced by their respective abbreviation given below.

For example, a preamble specifying the optional License-Code header might look like:

    License:         CC0-1.0
    License-Code:    MIT

In this case, the code in the BIP is not available under CC0-1.0, but is only available under the terms of the MIT

> License.

Reviewer 3: I suggest adding the recommendation that any source code files (or source directories) should specify their license, as is common in software (e.g., with a license header or a LICENSE/COPYING file). This makes sense because implementations are often copied without the rest of the BIP.

I also suggest making any "test vectors" / known input tests available under CC0 or GNU All Permissive. Everyone wants to copy test vectors in their implementations, so having them under a license different than your code is very annoying.

I also suggest allowing for "License-Code" to be something like "MIT (except where stated otherwise)" for complex cases, e.g., when files are under different licenses. A good example is the test vector thing. Then at least we don't need to bother with the header.

Author: Thanks, I added

> Each source code file or source directory should specify the license under which it is made available. It is recommended to make any test vectors available under CC0-1.0 or GNU-All-Permissive in addition to any other licenses to allow anyone to copy test vectors into their implementations without introducing license hindrances.

I’m not sure I’m comfortable introducing a new default that would cover existing contributions to the BIP repository that have not opted into that.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand. This would change a recommendation (and not a default), and only for future BIPs, no?

Author: > I also suggest allowing for "License-Code" to be something like "MIT (except where stated otherwise)" for complex cases, e.g., when files are under different licenses. A good example is the test vector thing. Then at least we don't need to bother with the header.

Oh, I think I read that as proposing it as a new policy for the whole repository rather than an option for a new BIP.

I have added:

>The licenses listed in the License-Code header apply to all source directories, source code files, and test vectors provided with the BIP except when the file header or a LICENSE file in a directory states otherwise.

in the License and License-Code headers.

It is recommended that BIPs that include literal code be dual-licensed under the same license terms as the project it
modifies. For example, literal code intended for Bitcoin Core would ideally be dual-licensed under the MIT license terms
as well as one of the above with the rest of the BIP text.

In all cases, details of the licensing terms must be provided in the Copyright section of the BIP.

#### Recommended licenses

* BSD-2-Clause: [OSI-approved BSD 2-clause license](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause)
* BSD-3-Clause: [OSI-approved BSD 3-clause license](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause)
* CC0-1.0: [Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)
* GNU-All-Permissive: [GNU All-Permissive License](http://www.gnu.org/prep/maintain/html_node/License-Notices-for-Other-Files.html)

#### Not recommended, but acceptable licenses[^licenses]

* CC-BY-4.0: [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
* CC-BY-SA-4.0: [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

> * MIT: [Expat/MIT/X11 license](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Reviewer 3: I think there should be either
 - no distinction between recommended and not recommended at all,
 - or a rationale for why some are recommended and some are not.  (A possible rationale could be that even CC-BY(-SA) can be annoying in practice, e.g., if people copy sections/tables from BIPs into source files.) 

In any case, I think that the MIT is, for most purposes, virtually equivalent to BSD, and I don't see a reason to recommend one over the other, except maybe license proliferation. (But then, it's strange anyway that BIPs are often BSD but code in the ecosystem is often MIT, so you can make a point for either side...)

Author: Thanks that’s a nice simplification. I’ve folded "Recommended licenses" and "Not recommended acceptable lincenses" into "Acceptable licenses".

To be honest, the license aspect of the process is not my forte or at the center of my interests. I am more than happy to consider any further suggestions, especially simplifications to that aspect of the proposal.

  - Deferred, Obsolete, Rejected, Replaced, and Withdrawn are gathered up into Abandoned.[^abandoned]
  - Final and Active are collapsed into Active.
  - The remaining statuses are Draft, Proposed, Active, and Abandoned.
- BIPs no longer get rejected solely on grounds of not making progress for three years.[^rejection]
- A BIP may be set to Abandoned by its Author, or by anyone if it appears to have stopped making progress for at least a
  year and its Author does not assert that they are still working on it when contacted.
- Many judgment calls previously required from BIP Editors are reassigned either to the BIP Author or the repository’s
  audience.
- Tracking of adoption, acceptance, and community consensus is out of scope for the BIPs repository, except to determine
  whether a BIP is in active use for the move into or out of the Active status.
- "Other Implementations" sections are discouraged.[^OtherImplementations]
- Auxiliary files are only permitted in the corresponding BIP’s subdirectory, as no one used the alternative of labeling
  them with the BIP number.
- The set of acceptable licenses was reduced to the ones previously used.

> ### Updates to existing BIPs should this BIP be activated

Reviewer 7: I think it would be helpful to add a "Revision" field to the header preamble if a BIP already has a Changelog that complies with the semantic versioning inspired scheme specified in this BIP.

may be ignored/overruled by general agreement that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning must be
given in such circumstances. An Active Process BIP may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification
has rough consensus per the same criteria.[^living-documents]

##### Revisions

To help implementers understand updates to a BIP, any changes after it has reached Ready or Active are
tracked with version, date, and description in a Changelog section. The version number is inspired by semantic
versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH). The MAJOR version is incremented if changes to the BIP’s Specification are introduced
that are incompatible with prior versions (which should be an exception after a BIP is Ready, and not happen to a
BIP that is Active). The MINOR version is incremented whenever the specification of the BIP
is changed or extended in a backward-compatible way. The PATCH version is incremented for other changes to the BIP that
are noteworthy (bug fixes, test vectors, important clarifications, etc.). The version should start at 1.0.0 with the

> date the BIP was promoted to Ready. An example for a Changelog section can be seen in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
date the BIP was promoted to Ready. An example of a Changelog section can be seen in
```

Preamble must indicate the latest version in the Revision header.

#### Abandoned[^abandoned]

A BIP that is _not in active use_, may be labeled Abandoned when its author has stopped working on it, no longer
recommends the proposed approach, or no longer pursues adoption of their completed proposal. The reason for moving the
proposal to Abandoned should be recorded in the Changelog section in the same commit that updates the status.

##### Preliminary ↦ Abandoned

BIP authors may decide on their own to change their BIP’s status from Preliminary to Abandoned. If a Preliminary BIP stops making
progress, sees accumulated feedback unaddressed, or otherwise appears stalled for a year, the community may move the BIP
to Abandoned unless the authors assert that they intend to continue work when contacted.

##### Ready ↦ Abandoned

BIPs that had attained Ready status, i.e. that had been recommended for adoption, may be moved to Abandoned per
the author’s announcement to the Bitcoin Developer Mailing List after not being opposed within 28 days. To successfully
oppose the move, at least one of the opposers must become the new BIP author for the BIP to remain Ready. A BIP

> can also be moved to Abandoned by the community, if it has had Ready status for at least one year, there is no

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
can also be moved to Abandoned by the community if it has had Ready status for at least one year, there is no
```

evidence of it being in active use, and its authors do not object or fail to respond, unless a new author volunteers
within four weeks.

##### Active ↦ Abandoned

A BIP may evolve from Active to Abandoned when it is no longer in active use. Any community member may initiate this
Status update by announcing it to the mailing list, and proceed if no objections have been raised for four weeks.

##### Abandoned ↦ Preliminary

> The Abandoned status is generally intended to be the final status for BIPs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Abandoned status is generally intended to be a final status for BIPs.
```

If a BIP Author decides to make another attempt at a previously abandoned proposal, it is generally recommended to
create a new proposal. (Obviously, the author may borrow any amount of inspiration or actual text from any prior BIPs as
licensing permits.) The author should take special care to address the issues that caused the prior attempt’s
abandonment. Even if the prior attempt had been assigned a number, the new BIP will generally be assigned a distinct
number, unless it is obvious that the new attempt is a direct continuation of the prior work.

### Adoption of proposals

The BIPs repository does not track the sentiment on proposals and does not track the adoption of BIPs beyond whether
they are in active use or not. It is not intended for BIPs to list additional implementations beyond the reference

> implementation: the BIPs repository is not a sign-post where to find implementations.[^OtherImplementations] After a BIP

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
implementation: the BIPs repository is not a signpost where to find implementations.[^OtherImplementations] After a BIP
```

when no other license is granted:

* PD: Released into the public domain
* OPL: [Open Publication License, version 1.0](http://opencontent.org/openpub/)

## BIP Editors

The current BIP editors are:

* Bryan Bishop ([kanzure@gmail.com](mailto:kanzure@gmail.com))
* Jon Atack ([jon@atack.com](mailto:jon@atack.com))
* Luke Dashjr ([luke_bipeditor@dashjr.org](mailto:luke_bipeditor@dashjr.org))
* Mark "Murch" Erhardt ([murch@murch.one](mailto:murch@murch.one))
* Olaoluwa Osuntokun ([laolu32@gmail.com](mailto:laolu32@gmail.com))
* Ruben Somsen ([rsomsen@gmail.com](mailto:rsomsen@gmail.com))

### BIP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow

The BIP editors subscribe to the Bitcoin development mailing list and watch the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips).
Off-list BIP-related correspondence should be sent (or CC'd) to the BIP editors.

When a new BIP idea is submitted to the mailing list, BIP editors and other community members should comment in regard
to:

* Novelty of the idea
* Viability, utility, and relevance of the concept
* Readiness of the draft
* On-topic for the Bitcoin community

> We observe that discussion in pull requests comments can often be hard to follow as feedback gets marked as resolved

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We observe that discussion in pull request comments can often be hard to follow as feedback gets marked as resolved
```
Or "pull requests' comments" if you want to refer to plural PRs, but singular seems better to me.

  whether a BIP is in active use for the move into or out of the Active status
- "Other Implementations" sections are discouraged[^OtherImplementations]
- Auxiliary files are only permitted in the corresponding BIP’s subdirectory, as no one used the alternative of labeling
  them with the BIP number
- List of acceptable licenses was reduced to the ones previously used

### Updates to existing BIPs should this BIP be activated

#### Previous BIP Process

This BIP supersedes BIP 2 as the guideline for the BIP process.

#### BIP types

Standards Track BIPs and eligible Informational BIPs are assigned the Specification type. The Standards Track type is
considered obsolete. Specification BIPs use the Layer header rules specified in [BIP 123](BIP-0123.mediawiki).

#### Comments

The Comments-URI and Comment-Summary headers should be removed from all BIPs whose comment page in the wiki is empty.
For existing BIPs whose comment page has content, BIP authors may keep both headers or remove both headers at their
discretion. It is recommended that existing wiki pages are not modified due to the activation of this BIP.

#### Status field

> Subsequent to the activation of this BIP, the Status field of any existing BIPs that do not fit the specification in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After the activation of this BIP, the Status fields of existing BIPs that do not fit the specification in
```

    also overstated the importance of individual comments directly in the Preamble of BIPs. As collecting feedback in
    this accessible fashion failed, the new process puts the onus back on the audience to make their own evaluation.
[^layer]: **Why is the layer header now permitted for other BIP types?**  
    The layer header had already been used by many Informational BIPs, so the rule that it is only available to
    Standards Track BIPs is dropped.
[^OtherImplementations]: **What is the issue with "Other Implementations" sections in BIPs?**  
    In the past, some BIPs had "Other Implementations" sections that caused frequent change requests to existing BIPs.
    This put an onus on the BIP authors, and frequently led to lingering pull requests due to the corresponding BIPs’
    authors no longer participating in the process. Many of these alternative implementations eventually became
    unmaintained or were low-quality to begin with. Therefore, "Other Implementations" sections are heavily discouraged.
[^preliminary]: **Why has the Draft status been renamed to Preliminary?**  

>     The term "draft" appears all over this document and was inconsistently overlapping with the status field value.

Reviewer 5: Not sure but maybe something like
```suggestion
    The term "draft" appears all over this document and conflicted with the status field value of the same name.
```

    Also, "Draft" stood out as the only noun among the status field values. Preliminary fits the intended meaning and
    does not appear otherwise in the process description.
[^ready]: **Why has the Proposed status been renamed to Ready?**  
    Some reviewers of this BIP raised that in a process that outlines the workflow of Bitcoin Improvement _Proposals_
    using "Proposed" as a status field value was overloading the term: clearly _proposals_ are proposed at all stages of
    the process.
[^rejection]: **Why can proposals remain in Preliminary or Ready indefinitely?**  
    The automatic 3-year timeout of BIPs has led to some disagreement in the past and seems unnecessary in cases where
    the author is still active in the community and still considers their idea worth pursuing. On the other hand,

>     proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year which hopefully achieves the main

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year which achieves the main
```
Nit, this is more confident, but if that's too strong, maybe "which should achieve". The word "hopefully" expresses an emotion, which arguably is out of place in a document like this (just IMO).

Author: Thanks, I have amended this to 

```diff
-proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year which hopefully achieves the main
-goals of the original rule.
+proposals that appear stale may be tested and cleared out after only one year which should achieve the main
+goal of the original rule.
```

    corresponding low information quality of the summaries that resulted from that feature, this BIP instead intends to
    leave the evaluation of BIPs to the audience.
[^markdown]: **Which flavor of markdown is allowed?**  
    The author of this proposal has no opinion on Markdown flavors, but recommends that proposals stick to the basic
    Markdown syntax features commonly shared across Markdown dialects.
[^living-documents]: **Why are Process BIPs living documents?**  
    In the past years, the existing BIPs process has not always provided a clear approach to all situations. For
    example, the content of BIP 2 appears to have been penned with fork proposals in mind. It seems clear that the
    Bitcoin development will evolve in many surprising ways in the future. Instead of mandating the effort of writing a
    new process every so often to catch up with new challenges, it seems preferable to allow the process to adapt to the
    concerns of the future. Therefore, we define Process BIPs as living documents that remain open to amendment.
[^new-BIP]: **Why should the specification of an implemented BIP no longer be changed?**  

>     After a Ready or Active BIP has been deployed by one or more implementation, breaking changes to the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    After a Ready or Active BIP has been deployed by one or more implementations, breaking changes to the
```

    specification could lead to a situation where multiple "compliant" implementations fail at
    being interoperable, because they implemented different versions of the same BIP. Therefore, even changes to the
    specification of Ready BIPs should be avoided, but active BIPs should never be subject to breaking changes to
    their specification.

> [^settled]: **What is meant with a BIP being settled?**  

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[^settled]: **What is meant by a BIP being settled?**  
```

status to _PROPOSED_ to indicate that they recommend adoption or implementation
of the BIP. Where applicable, the champion must ensure that any proposed
specification is solid, not unduly complicated, and definitive. Subsequently, a

> BIP’s content should only be adjusted in minor details to clarify ambiguities, fill-in omissions, add coverage for

Author: +clarify language

## Changes from BIP-2

- Status field is no longer modeled around the workflow of consensus changes. The only remaining status are DRAFT,

>   PROPOSED, ACTIVE, and ABANDONED. The statuses Active, Deferred, Rejected, Final, Replaced, Obsolete, and Withdrawn are

Author: Active is back
